 
1 
 Eighty  Years of the Finite Element Method:  Birth, Evolution, and Future   
 
 
Wing Kam Liu, Northwestern University  
Shaofan Li, UC Berkeley  
Harold S. Park, Boston University  
 
This year marks the eightieth anniversary of the invention of the finite element method (FEM).  
FEM has become the computational workhorse for engineering design analysis and scientific 
modeling of a wide range of physical processes, including material and  structural mechanics, fluid 
flow and heat conduction, various biological processes for medical diagnosis and surgery planning, 
electromagnetics and semi -conductor circuit and chip design and analysis, additive manufacturing,  
i.e. virtually every conceivab le problem that can be  described by partial differential equations 
(PDEs ). FEM has fundamentally revolutionized the way we do scientific modeling and 
engineering design, ranging from automobiles, aircraft, marine structures, bridges, highways, and 
high-rise buildings.  Associated with the development of finite element methods has been the 
concurrent development of an engineering science discipline called computational mechanics, or 
computational science and engineering.  
 
In this paper, we present a historic al perspective  
on the developments of finite element methods 
mainly focusing on its applications  and related 
developments  in solid and structural mechanics, 
with limited discussions to other fields in which 
it has made significant impact, such as fluid 
mechanics, heat transfer, and fluid -structure 
interaction . To have a complete storyline, we 
divide the  development of the finite element 
method into four time periods: I. (1941 -1965) 
Early years of  FEM ; II. (1966 -1991) Golden age 
of FEM ; III. (1992 -2017) Large scale, industrial 
applications of FEM and development of material modeling, and IV (2018 -) the state -of-the-art 
FEM technology for the current and future eras of FEM research.  Note  that this paper may  not 
strictly follow the chronological order of FEM  developments, because often  time these 
developments were  interw oven  across different time periods.  
 
I. (1941 -1965) The birth  of the finite element method  
The origin of the finite element method as a numerical modeling  paradigm may be traced back to 
in early  1940’s. In 1941, A. Hrennik off, a Russian -Canadian structural engineer at the University 
of British Columbia, published a paper in ASME Journal of Appli ed Mechanics on his membrane 
and plate model as a lattice framework . This paper  is now generally regarded as a turning point 
that led to the birth of FEM .  In Hrennikoff’s 1941  paper , he discretized the solution domain into 
a mesh of lattice structure, whi ch was the earliest form of a mesh discretizatio n. 
 
On May 3rd, 1941, the same  year that Hrennikoff published his paper , R. Courant of New York 
University  delivered an invited lecture  at a meeting of the American Mathematical Society held in 


 
2 
 Washington D.C. on  his numerical 
treatment using a variational method to 
solve a second order PDE , which  arises 
from Saint -Venant’s torsion problem of a 
cylinder. In this work, Courant 
systematically used the Rayleigh  Ritz 
method with a trial function defined on 
finite triangle subdomains, which is a 
primitive form of the finite element 
method. Courant’s presentation  was later 
published as a paper in 1943. Similar 
works of discretization and variational 
formulations we re also reported in the 
literature, including McHenry [1943], 
Prager and Synge [1947], and Synge 
[1957].  As Ray Clough commented in his 1980 paper, One aspect of the FEM, mathematical 
modeling of continua by discrete elements, can be related to work done i ndependently in the 19 40s 
by McHenry and Hrennikoff -formulating bar element assemblages to simulate plane stress systems. 
Indeed, I spent the summer of 1952 at the Boeing Airplane Company trying to adapt this procedure 
to the analysis of a delta airplane wing, the problem which eventually led to the FEM . 
 
By the  early 1950s, several engineers and academics had further developed  and extended the se 
early approach es to solve real engineering problems in aeronautical and civil engineering.  In 
parallel but with different emphases , J. H. Argyris (1954) at the Imperial College London, and M. 
J. Turner (1950 -1956) at Boeing Company, who was later joined by R. Clough of U C Berkeley 
and H.C. Martin of Washington University, developed what we know today as the earl iest form of 
the finite element method (1954), which was called the Matrix Stiffness Method at the time .  
However, in 1960  R. Clough coined the phrase Finite Eleme nt Method , and  this unassuming and 
right -to-the-point phrase was an instan t hit, bring ing out the essence of the method.  
 
Using the language of engineers, 
Argyris “translated ” Courant’s 
variational approach into the 
energy method  of engineering 
structures , while importantly, 
Turner, Clough, Martin, and Topp 
developed  FEM  interpolant s for 
triang ular element s, which is 
suitable for structural parts with 
arbitrary shape.  In some sense, the 
invention of the triangle element 
was a “quantum leap ”, and hence  
for a large spectrum of the 
engineering community, the inception of the FEM is the publication of the landmark paper   by 
Turner, Clough, Martin, and Topp in 1956. The following is an excerpt from a 2014 document that 
celebrates   the 50th anniversar y of the formation of National Academy of Engineering, which is an 


 
3 
 official account of that part of FEM history: To 
ensure  safety and avoid costly modifications 
after planes entered production, engineers 
needed a reliable method for determine in 
advance whether their designs could withstand 
the stresses of fight. M. Jon Turner, head of 
Boeing’s Structural Dynamics Unit, address ed 
that problem in the early 1950s by bringing civil 
engineering professor Ray Clough of the 
University of California, Berkeley, and Harold 
Martin of the University of Washington to 
Boeing for summer ``faculty internships,’’ 
Collectively, they created a me thod of structural 
analysis that Turner applied at Boeing using 
computers to perform the myriad calculations 
need to predict real -world performance .  That fruitful collaboration led to Clough’s  development 
a few years later of what he  named the finite elem ent method (FEM).  Clough formed a research 
group at UC  Berkeley that used FEM in a host of  analytical and experimental activities,  from 
designing buildings and structures  to withstand nuclear blasts or  earthquakes to analyzing 
structural  requirements for spacecraft and  deep-water offshore  drilling, led to Clough’s  
development a few years later of what he  named the finite element method (FEM).  Clough formed 
a research group at UC  Berkeley that used FEM in a host of  analytical and experiment al activities,  
from designing buildings and structures  to withstand nuclear blasts or  earthquakes to analyzing 
structural  requirements for spacecraft and  deep -water offshore  drilling. By revolutionizing  the 
application  of computer  technologies in  engineeri ng, FEM continues to help engineers design to 
this day all  sorts of durable, cost -effective structures.  Meanwhile, Turner’s efforts at Boeing  
contributed to the success of its renowned line  of commercial jets, beginning in 1958 with the  707 
and continuing in 1964 with the 727, which  could land on shorter runways and serve more  airports. 
Equipped with three fuel -efficient turbofan  engines, the 727 became the workhorse  of commercial 
aviation and helped achieve a  threefold 
increase in U.S. passenger air traff ic in 
the ’60s.  
    
Independently and separately, in the 
early 1960s, Kang Feng of  the Chinese 
Academy of Science  also proposed a 
discretization numerical method based 
on variational principle s for solving 
elliptic  partial differential equations.  As 
Peter Lax  (1993)  commented, 
“Independently of parallel developments 
in the West. he (Feng) created a theory 
of the fini te element method. He was 
instrumental in both the implementation 
of the method and the creation of its 


 
4 
 theoretical foundation using estimates in Sobolev spaces ….”, which was one of the first 
convergence stud ies of finite element methods .       
                                                                                               
During this period,  several great engineering minds were focusing on developing finite element 
methods. In particular, J. Argyris  with his co -workers at the University of Stuttgart; R. Clough and 
colleagues such as E. L. Wilson and R. L. Taylor at the University of California, Berkele y; O. 
Zienkiewicz with his colleagues such as E. Hinton and B. Irons at Swansea University; P. Ciarlet 
at the University of Paris XI; R. Gallager and his group at Cornell University, R. Melosh at Philco 
Corporation , and B. Fraeijs de Veubeke at the University de Liege  had made some important and 
significant contributions to developments of finite element methods.  
 
To understand what happened 
sixty years ago, we quote  an 
excerpt from a FEM history 
paper by Clough and Wilson in 
1999 , in which the y recalled:  
When Clough presented the first 
paper using the finite element 
terminology in 1960 it attracted 
the attention of his friend, 
Professor O. C. Zienkiewicz, 
who was then on the faculty at 
Northwestern University.  A few 
weeks after the presentatio n of 
the paper Zienkiewicz invited Clough to present a seminar on the finite element method to his 
students.  Zienkiewicz was considered one of the world’s experts on the application of the finite 
difference method to the solution of continuum mechanics pr oblems in Civil Engineering; 
therefore, Clough was prepared to debate the relative merits of the two methods.  However, after 
a few penetrating questions about the finite element method, Zienkiewicz was almost an instant 
convert to the method.  
 
Zdenek Bazant, then a visiting Associate Research Engineer at UC Berkeley, recalled: …… The 
founding  of FEM  was Clough’s  1960  paper  in the ASCE  Conf.  on Electronic  Computation  (Clough  
(1960),  which  was the first to derive,  by virtual  work,  the finite  eleme nt stiffness  matrix  of an 
element  of a continuum  (a triangular  constant  strain  element).   …….  I recall  Ray Clough  showing  
to me his 1962  report  to the U.S. Engineer  District,  Little  Rock,  Corps  of Engineers  on his analysis  
of a crack  observed  in Norfolk  Dam (Clough (1962)),  during  my stay in Berkeley  in 1969.  I was 
mesmerized  by seeing  that 1962  report.   It presented  a 2D stress  analysis  of large  crack  observed  
in Norfork  dam.  The dam was subdivided  into about  200 triangular  elements  and provided  stress  
contours  for a number  of loading  cases.   ……  Clough  was at that time way ahead  of anybody  else.  
 
To collaborate  Z. Bazant’s  recollection,  we cite Ed Wilson’s  recount  of that part of the history:   
In 1956,  Ray, Shirley,  and three  small  children  spent  a year in Norway  at the Ship Research  
Institute  in Trondheim.  The engineers  at the institute  were  calcu lating  stresses  due to ship 
vibrations  in order  to predict  fatigue  failures  at the stress  concentrations.  This is when  Ray 
realized  his element  research  should  be called  the Finite  Element  Method  which  could  solve  many  


 
5 
 different  types  of problems  in contin uum mechanics.  Ray realized  the FEM  was a direct  competitor  
to the Finite  Difference  Method.  At that time FDM  was being  used to solve  many  problems  in 
continuum  mechanics.   His previous  work  at Boeing,  the Direct  Stiffness  Method,  was only used 
to calculat e displacements  not stresses.  
In the fall semester  of 1957,  Ray returned  from  his sabbatical  leave  in Norway  and immediately  
posted  a page  on the student  bulletin  board  asking  students  to contact  him if they were  interested  
in conducting  finite  element  research  for the analysis  of membrane,  plate,  shell,  and solid  
structures.  Although  Ray did not have  funding  for finite  element  research,  a few graduate  students  
who had other  sources  of funds  responded.  At that time,  the only digital  computer  in the College  
of Engineering  was an IBM 701 that was produced  in 1951  and was based  on vacuum  tube 
technology.  The maximum  number  of linear  equations  that it could  solve  was 40. Consequently,  
when  Ray presented  his first FEM  paper  in September  1960,  “The  Finite  Element  Method  in Plane  
Stress  Analysis,”at  the ASCE  2nd Conference  on Electronic  Computation  in Pittsburgh,  
Pennsylvania,  the coarse-mesh  stress -distribution  obtained  was not very accurate.  Therefore,  most  
of the attendees  at the conference  were  not impressed.  After  the improvement  of the speed  and 
capacity  of the computers  on the Berkeley  campus,  Professor  Clough’s  paper  was a very fine mesh  
analysis  of an existing  concrete  dam.  The paper  was first presented  in September  1962  at a NATO  
conference  in Lisbon,  Portugal.  Within  a few months,  the paper  was republished  in an 
international  Bulletin,  which  had a very large  circulation,  as “Stress  Analysis  of a Gravity  Dam  
by the Finite  Element  Method”,  (with  E. Wilson),  International  Bulletin  RILEM,  No. 10, June 
1963.   
The Lisbon  paper  reported  on the finite  element  analysis  of the 250-foot-high Norfork  Dam  
in Arkansas,  which  had developed  a vertical  crack  during  construction  in 1942.  The FEM  analysis  
correctly  predicted  the location  and size of the crack  due to the temperature  changes  and produced  
realistic  displacements  and stresses  within  the dam and foundation  for both gravity  and several  
hydrostatic  load conditions.  Because  of this publication,  many  international  students  and visiting  
scholars  came  to Berk eley to work  with Professor  Clough.   Also,  he freely  gave  the FORTRAN  
listing  of their  finite  element  analysis  computer  program  to be used to evaluated  displacement  and 
stresses  in other  two-dimensional  plane  structures  with different  geometry,  materials  and loading.  
Therefore,  professional  engineers  could  easily  use the powerful  new FEM  to solve  for the stress  
distributions  in their  structural  engineering  problems  in continuum  mechanics.  However,  he did 
not capitalize  on his success  in the development  of the FEM.  He returned  to the task of building  
the earthquake  engineering  program  at Berkeley  – the task he given  when  he was first hired  in 
1949.  
 
For his decisive  contribution  to the developments  of FEM,  Ray William  Clough  was awarded  the 
National  Medal  of Science  in 1994  by the then vice-president  of the United  States  Al Gore.  Today,  
the general  consensus  is that Ray Clough  along  with J. Argyris  and O. C. Zienkiewicz  made  the 
most  significant  contributions  to the developments  of finite  element  method  after an early 
mathematical pre -working of  Richard Courant .  
 

 
6 
 It is worth noting that E. L. Wilson 
of UC Berkeley was the first person 
to develop finite element open -
source software. An excerpt from 
the Clough and Wilson ’s paper in 
1999  stated :   In 1958 Wilson, under 
the direction of Clough, initiated 
the development of an automated 
finite element program based on 
the rectangular plane stress finite 
element developed at Boeing. After 
several months of learning to 
program the IBM 701, Wilson 
produced a lim ited capacity, 
semiautomated program which was 
based on the force method. An MS research report was produced, which has long since been 
misplaced, with the approximate title of Computer Analysis of Plane Stress Structures.  …… In 
1959 the IBM 704 computer w as installed on the Berkeley Campus.  It had 32K of 32 bit memory 
and a floating point arithmetic unit which was approximately 100 times faster than the IBM 701.  
This made it possible to solve practical structures using fine meshes.   
 
It is also worth me ntioning that in 1963, I.T. Oden, a senior structural engineering in the research 
and development division of General Dynamics Corporation at Fort Worth  at the time, wrote a 
163-page comprehensive technical report with G.C. Best, in which they developed a long list of 
solid and structure finite elements.  including tetrahedr al element, hexahedr al element, thin plate 
element, thick plate element, plate element with stringers or stiffeners, composite sandwich plate 
elements, and shallow shell elements (Best and Oden (1963)). In fact, Oden and Best wrote one of 
the first general purpose finite elemen t computer codes at the time. The Fortran FEM code 
developed by Oden and Best ha d an element library that includes elements for 3D elasticity, 2D 
plane elasticity, 3D beam and rod elements, composite layered plate and shell elements, and 
elements for gener al composite materials. Their work also included hybrid methods and stress 
based FEMs, which may be even earlier than those of Pian (Pian (1964)). Moreover, Oden and 
Best’s FEM code is also able to handle FEM eigenvalue modal analysis, and numerical integr ations 
over triangle and tetrahedra elements, and it had linear system solvers for general FEM static 
analysis that were among the most effective at that time . This FEM computer code was used for 
many years in aircraft analysis and design in the aerospace and defense industry . 
In terms of worldwide research interest, by 1965, finite element research had become a highly 
active field, with the total number of papers published in the literature exceeding 1000. During this 
period, there were two seemingly unrel ated events for FEM development, but  significantly 
affect ed future  FEM developments . These events were the discovery of mixed variational 
principles in elasticity. In 1950, E. Reissner rediscovered E. Hellinger ’s mixed variational 
principle  from 1914 , in which both the displacement field and the stress field are the primary 
unknowns . This variational principle is called the  Hellinger -Reissner variational principle. Shortly  
after, H. Hu in 1954 and K. Washizu in 19 55 proposed a three -field mixed variational principle in 


 
7 
 elasticity, which was called the Hu -Washizu variational principle.  As early as 19 64, Theodore H .H. 
Pian recognized the potential of using these variational principles to formulate Galerkin weak  
form -based finite element  formulations and  proposed the assumed stress finite element method. 
This beg an the use of  mixed variational principles to formulate Ga lerkin finite element methods , 
which was followed by the  assumed strain finite element method developed by Juan Simo and his 
co-workers in the later period of finite element developments . 
 
II. (1966 -1991) The Golden Age of the Finite Element Method  
The mid 1960s saw rapid developments in finite element method research and applications.  As 
TJR Hughes recalled, “I first heard the words  ‘the Finite Element Method ’ in 1967 – which 
changed my life.  I started to read everything that was available and convinced my boss to start 
the Finite Element Method Development Group, which he did.  Dr. Henno Allik was Group Leader, 
and I was in the Group, then we added programmer s.  In one year, we had a 57,000 -line code, 
GENSAM ( General Structural  Analysis and  Matrix Program, or something like that).  That was 
1969, and the code was continually developed thereafter and may still be in development and use 
at GD/Electric Boat and G eneral Atomics, originally a division of General Dynamics .” 
 
Starting from the end of 19 60s, the rigorous  approximation theory that underpins the  finite  element 
method started to be developed. This movement was first highlighted by  the proof of optimal and 
superconve rgence of finite element methods .  This  attracted the interests of some distinguished 
mathematicians  all over the world, including  G. Birkhof f, M.H. Schultz, R.S. Varaga, J. Bramble, 
M. Zlamal,  J. Cea,  JP. Aubin, J. Douglas, T. Dupont, LC. Goldstein, LR . Scott, J . Nitsche, AH. 
Schatz, PG. Cialet , G. Strang, G. Fix, JL. Lions, M.  Crouzeix, PA. Raviart, and I . Babuska , AK. 
Aziz,  and J.T. Oden . Some  useful results  developed for the proof of FEM convergence  are the Cea 
lemma and the  Bramble -Hubert lemma . The fundamental work of N itsche [1970] on L∞ estimates 
for general classes of linear elliptic problems must stand out as one of the most i mportant 
contributions for mathematical foundation of FEM in  1970s.  It may be noted that unlike other 
mathematics movement s, the convergence study of finite element method s was an engineering -
oriented  movement .  The  mathematicians soon found that , in practice, engineers were using either 
non-conforming FEM interpolant s or numerical quadrature that violate s variational principle s or 
the standard bilinear form in Hilbert space .  Gilbert Strang  referred  to these numerical techniques  
as “variational crime s”. To  circumvent  
complicate d convergence  proof s, the early 
patch test s were  invented by Bruce Iron 
and Robert Melosh , which were  prove n to 
be instrumental for ensuring convergence 
to the correct solution.  
 
Following  Theod ore Pian’s invention of 
the assumed stress element, attention  
shifted to the mixed variational principle 
based finite element method.  In 1966, L . 
Hermann proposed a mixed variational 
principle for incompressible solids. 
However, most mixed variational 
principles are not extreme variational 


 
8 
 principles, and thus suffer  from  
numerical in stability. In early 
1970s, I. Babuska and F . Brezzi 
discovered t heir groundbreaking  
result s, known today as the 
Babuska -Brezzi condition, or the 
LBB condition, giving tribute to 
O. Ladyzhenskya --- a Russian 
female mathematician, who 
provided the early insight of this 
problem. The so -called LBB 
condition, or the inf -sup condition, 
provides a sufficient condition for 
a saddle point problem to have a unique solution that depends continuously on the input data;  thus,  
it provides a guideline to construct shape functions for the mixed variational principle -based finite 
eleme nt method.   
 
Entering the 1970s, FEM  development began  to focus on using FEM to simulate the dynamic 
behavior of structures, including crashworthiness in the automotive industry. Various time 
integration methods had been developed, including the Newmark -beta method, the Wilson -theta 
method, the Hilbert -Hughes -Taylor algorithm,  the Houbolt integration algorithm, and the explicit 
time integration algorithms.  
In the late 1970s, T. Belytschko, K. C. Park, and later TJR Hughes proposed using explicit or 
implicit -explicit, explicit -multiple explicit time integration, and implicit time integration with 
damping control to solve nonlinear structur al deformation and structural dynamics problems. It 
turned out that  the explicit time integration was a game changer for the automotive industry, 
establishing FEM technology as the main tool of passenger vehicle design and crashworthiness 
analysis. By the end of 1980s, there  were thousands of workstations running explicit time 
integration -based FEM codes in the three major automakers in the United States.  
 
One of the main FEM research topics in 
the 1980s was using finite element 
techniques  to solve  the Navier -Stokes 
equation as an alternative to finite 
difference and finite volume methods.  
Starting  the early 1970s,  JT Oden and his 
co-workers had begun  work ing on finite 
element solutions for fluid dynamics 
(Oden and Wellford (1972)).  TJR Hughe 
and his co -workers  Brooks  and Tezduyar 
developed the streamline upwind/Petrov 
Galerkin method and later Stabilized 
Galerkin finite element method to solve 
Navier -Stokes equations under various initial and boundary conditions.  Furthermore,  Hughes and 
co-workers later developed space -time finite element method s and variational multiscale finite 
element methods  (see Hughes and Tezdyuar (1981) Brooks and Hughes (1982) , Mizukami and  


 
9 
 Hughes (1985) , and Hughes (1995) ). For this work, from 1986  to 1991 , Hughes and his co -workers 
such as LP Franca and others wrote a ten -part series on finite element formulation for 
computational fluid dynamics (Hughes  et al. (1986) and  Shakib et al. (1991) ). 
 
Among the many advances in finite element technologies  in 1980s, the most notable may belong 
to J. Simo at the University of California, Berkeley and later at Stanford University. Simo and 
Taylor developed the consistent tangent operator for computational plasticity, which was a 
milestone after th e original concept of consistent linearization proposed by T JR Hughes and K. 
Pister. Moreover, after the Hughes -Liu 3D degenerated continuum shell and beam elements and 
the Belytchko -Tsay single -point element, Simo and his co -workers, such as L. Vu -Quoc an d D.D. 
Fox, developed geometrically exact beam and shell theories and its finite element formulation. 
Simo and his co -worker such as MS Rifai and F. A rmero also developed various assumed strain 
or enhanced strain methods for mixed variational formulations . It should be noted that E. Ramm 
and his colleagues at the University of Stuttgart  have also made significant contributions on 
geometrically nonlinear shell element formulation s over a span of more than thirty years  e.g., 
Bischoff and Ramm (1998) . 
Another highlight of FEM 
technology is the development 
of FEM solvers for fluid -
structure interaction. From the 
mid-1970s to early 1990s, there 
was an urgent need to develop 
techniques to solve large -scale 
fluid -structure intera ction 
problems in the aerospace and 
civil engineering industries.  A 
class of finite element fluid -
structure interaction solvers 
were developed, and some early 
contributors include J. Donea, A. Huerta  (see Do nea and Huerta (2003) , Donea et al. (2017) ), and 
the Hughes -Liu-Zimmermann Arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian (ALE) fluid -structure finite element 
formulation,  which describes  the moving boundary problem. ALE -based finite element 
simulations were used due to their ability to alleviate many of the drawbacks of traditional 
Lagrangian -based and Eulerian -based finite element formulations . 
 
When  using the ALE technique in engineering modeling and simulations, the computational mesh 
inside the domains can move arbitrarily to optimize the shapes of elemen ts, while the mesh on the 
boundaries and interfaces of the domains can move along with materials to precisely track the 
boundaries and interfaces of a multi -material system. The invention of ALE finite element method 
may be credited to Hirt, Amsden, and Co ok (1974). C. Farhat was the first person to use large scale 
parallel ALE -FEM solver to compute fluid -structure interaction problems . He and his group 
systematically applied FEM -based computational fluid dynamics (CFD) solver s for aircraft 
structure design  and analysis .  They developed  the finite element tearing and interconnecting 
(FETI) method for the scalable solution of large -scale systems of equations on massively parallel 
processors . 
 


 
10 
 The finite element fluid -structure interaction research had a major impact on many practical 
applications, such as providing  the foundation for the patient specific modeling of vascular disease 
and the FEM -based predictive medicine later devel oped by CA Taylor and TJR Hughes and their 
co-workers in the mid -1990s.  Holzapfel, Eberlein,  Wriggers, and Weizsäcker  developed large 
strain f inite element formulation  for soft biological membranes (Holzapfel et al. (1996)).  
 
Another major milestone  in the development of finite element method s was the invention and the 
development of  nonlinear probabilistic or random field finite element method , which was first 
developed by W . K. Liu and T . Belyt schko in the late 1980s.  By considering uncertainty in loading 
conditions, material behavior, geometric configuration, and support  or boundary condition s, the  
probabilistic finite element method provide d a stochastic approach in computational mechanics  
to account for all these uncertain aspects, which  could then be applied in structure  reliability 
analysis . The random field  finite element research has become crucial in civil and aerospace 
engineering  and the  field of uncertainty quantification .  
 
In the ea rly 1980’s , M.E. Botkin at General Motors research Lab, and  N. Kikuchi and his group 
at the  University  of Michigan developed  structural  shape optimization finite element method  for 
the automo tive industr y. Other contributors include M. H. Imam from  Uman Al -Qura University.  
This preceded the seminal 1988 paper of Bendsoe and Kikuchi, who developed a 
homogenization approach to finding the optimal shape of a structure under prescribed loading.  
Later developme nts in topology optimization were driven by O. Sigmund  and his students, such 
as Ge ngdong Cheng in China .  
 
One of the driving forces in the finite element method development during in the early decades  
was the safety analysis of big dams, at first, then of concrete nuclear reactor vessels for gas -
cooled reactors, e.g. , J. Rashid (1967), nuclear containments, a nd hypothetical nuclear reactor 
accidents (Marchertas et al. (1978), Bazant et al. (1980)) and of tunnels and of foundations for 
reinforced concrete structures. To simulate concrete failure, the vertical stress drop in finite 
elements and progressive softe ning technique were introduced already in 1968. However, the 
spurious mesh sensitivity and the necessity of localization limiter was generally overlooked until 
demonstrated mathematically in Bazant’s (1976), based on the fact that strain softening states o f 
small enough test specimens in stiff enough testing frames are stable. Numerically this was 
demonstrated by crack band finite element calculations in Bazant and Cedolin (1978), where it 
was also shown that spurious mesh sensitivity of sudden stress drop can be avoided by adjusting 
the material strength so as to ensure correct energy release rate. Hillerborg et al. (1976) avoided 
mesh sensitivity by using an interelement cohesive softening called the fictitious crack model. 
Despite the success of the early  FE calculations, the concept of progressive strain -softening 
damage was not generally accepted by mechanicians until its validity and limitations were 
demonstrated by Bazant and Belytschko (1985)).  They showed that the existence of elastic 
unloading stif fness (previously ignored) makes waves propagation  in a strain -softening state 
possible. In 1989, Lubliner, Oliver, Oller, and Onate (Lublinear et al. (1989)) developed a 
plastic -damage theory -based finite element formulation to model concrete materials by 
introducing internal variable s, which has the capacity of modeling concrete material degradation 
and cracking . Today,  the multiscale based homogenization and damage analysis method is the 
state -of-the-art finite element modeling for concrete m aterials (Wriggers and Moftah (2006)).  

 
11 
 In the middle of 1980s, the mesh sensitivity issue in calculating strain softening or strain 
localization problem in computational plasticity became a challenging topic. It was eventually 
accepted that the partial dif ferential equations that are associated with the classical plasticity 
become ill -posed after the material passes the yield point and enters into the softening stage. 
This especially became a dire situation when civil engineers applied FEM to solve complex 
structural and geotechnical engineering problems, which involved complex plastic deformations 
of concrete, rock, soil, clay, and granular material in general. Bazant and others realized that this 
is because the classical continuum plasticity theory lacks a n internal length scale. To remedy 
this problem, starting from the middle 1980s. Many efforts were devoted to establishing finite 
element formulations of nonlocal (Bazant, Belytschko, Chang (1984)), strain -gradient, strain -
Laplacian media, micropolar or Co sserat continua, because they provided an internal length scale, 
allowing FEM simulations to capture, in a mesh -independent manner, the strain softening, strain 
localization or shear band formation. Pijaudier -Cabot and Bazant (1987) developed an effective 
nonlocal finite element method in 
which nonlocality is applied only to 
the damage strain.Other influential 
and representative works in this topic 
are from R. De Borst [1991,1992], 
Peerlings and de Borst (1999), K. 
Willam, and P. Steinmann, and their 
co-workers [1993,1998].  
In 1976, TJR Hughes, RL. Taylor, JL. 
Sackman, A. Curnier, and W. 
Kanoknukulchai published a paper 
entitled “A finite element method for a 
class of contact -impact problems.” 
(Hughes et al. (1976) ). This is one of the earliest finite element analysi s in computational  contact 
mechanics . It is the  very first work on FEM modeling of dynamic contact and impact problems , 
and it plays an important role in the simulation accuracy for engineering problems involving  
interaction between different continuum objects .  Examples include  sheet metal forming, target 
impact and penetration, and interaction between pavement and tires. Developing accurate finite 
element contact algorithm s has been a focal point since the 1980s. Various FEM contact 
algorithms have been developed, and some main  contributors are N. Kikuchi, T. Oden,  J. Simo,  
P, Wriggers, R. Taylor, P. Papadopoulos,  and TA. Laursen.   FEM contact algorithm  research  
remained an active research topic until late 1990s  (see Kikuchi and Oden (1988),  Simo, Wriggers, 
and Taylor (1985), Papadopoulos and Taylor(1992) .  
In this period, one interesting emerging area was the development of finite element exterior 
calculus by D. Arnold, R. Falk, and R. Winther [2006]. The FEM exterior calculus  uses tools 
from  differential geometry, algebraic topology, and homological algebra to develop FEM 
discretization  that are compatible with the underl ying geometric, topological, and algebraic 
structures of the problems  that are under consideration . 
 
III. (1992 -2017) Broad Indus trial Applications and Material s Modeling  
The first major event in FEM development this period was the formulation  of the Zienkiewicz -
Zhu error estimator [1992] , which was a major contribution to the mathematical approximation 


 
12 
 theory of finite element methods in the 1990s. The Zienkiewicz -Zhu posteriori error estimators 
provide  the quality control of a finite element solution with an optimal use of computational 
resources by refining the mesh adaptively. The idea and spirit of Z ienkiewicz -Zhu was further 
carried out by Ainsworth and Oden  [1997] [2000] , and today using posteriori error estimation to 
improve the quality has been elevated to the height of Bayesian inference and Bayesian update.  
This research topic is now intimately r elated with what is now called validation and verification 
(V&V) procedure . 
 
Since the late 1970s, Szabo [1978] and Babuska [1981,1982]  started to develop hp version of FEM  
based on piecewise -polynomial approximations  that employ elements of variable size  (h) and 
polynomial degree  (p). They  discovered that the finite element method converges  exponentially 
when the mesh is refined using a suitable combination of h -refinements (dividing elements into 
smaller ones) and p -refinements  (increasing their polynomia l degree). The exponential 
convergence makes the method a very attractive choice compared to most other finite element 
methods , which only converge with an algebraic rate. This work continued until the late 1990s , 
spearheaded  by M. Ainsworth, L. Demkowicz,  JT. Oden, CAM . Duarte, OC . Zienkiewicz , and CE . 
Baumann  (see Demkowicz et al. (1989) Oden et al. (1989) ). J. Fish [ 1992] also  proposed a s -
version FEM by superposing additional mesh (es) of higher -order hierarchical elements  on top of 
the original mesh of C0 FEM discretization, so that it increases the resolution of the FEM solution.  
 
To solve material and structur al failure problems, research work in  the 1990s focus ed on 
variational principle based discretized methods to solve fracture mechanics problem s or strain 
localization problems. In 1994, Xu and Needleman developed a finite element cohesive zone 
model (CZM) that can simulate crack growth without remeshing, which was later further improved 
by M . Ortiz and his co -work ers, who used CZM finite element method  to solve fragmentation and 
material fatigue problems . It should be noted that long before the invention of cohesive zone model, 
S.T. Pietruszczak and Z. Mroz   (1981) developed the first cohesive finite element for sh ear fracture 
in soil.  Later, Bazant’s group at Northwestern University developed various interface finite 
element methods, such as the microplane model, to study size effects of concrete material and 
other composite materials (Brocca and Bazant (2001); Can er and Bazant (2009)).  Such models 
became a standard tool for simulating missile impact and explosions at, e.g., ERDA Vicksburg. 
A microplane FE model for fiber composites has been developed for Chrysler and Ford Co. to 
compare various designs of automobile crush -cans (Smilauer et al. (2011)). An anisotropic 
poromechanical microplane model has been formulated and used for FE analysis of hydraulic 
fracturing (Rahimi et al. (2019)).  
To alleviate mesh bias issues in modeling material fracture and damage problems, T. Belytschko 
and WK. Liu  develop ed meshfree particle method s, namely the element -free Galerkin (EFG) 
method  and the reproducing kernel particle method (RKPM), which are based on  the moving least 
square method and the wavelet multiresolution analysis,  respectively .  RKPM  provides  
consisten cy and thus  convergence  enhancements as compared to  the popular smoothed particle 
hydrodynamics (S PH) method. S. Li [1999] and others have successfully  employed meshfree 
Galerkin method s to accurately simulate adiabatic shear band formation and propagation with 
minimum mesh adaptation.  At the same time, CA. Duarte and T. Oden developed the so -called 
hp-Cloud method ; E. Onate, S. Idelsohn. OC . Zienkiewicz, and RL . Taylor developed a finite point 
method [1996], and SN . Atluri and T. Zhu [1998] proposed a meshless local Petrov -Galerkin 

 
13 
 (MLP G) method, among many other meshfree methods .  Fleming and Belytschko also showed 
that singularity functions could be included in the approximation functions to greatly improve 
simulations involving fracture mechanics  (Fleming et al . (1997) ). 
One of the most challenging problems in the development of meshfree Galerkin method is how to 
integrate the weak form, because the meshfree interpolant s are highly irregular and it is difficult 
to make  them variational consistent. In 2001, J. S. Chen and his co -worke rs proposed a stabilized 
conforming nodal integration method for meshfree RKPM method, which is not only simple and 
stable, but also variational consistent  with the Galerkin weak formulation  (Chen et al. (2001)).   
Shortly after the meshfree  method  developm ents, I. Babuska and his co -workers developed the 
partition of unity finite element method  (PUFEM ), which w as later coined generalized finite 
element method ( GFEM ) (see Melenk and Babuska (1996)  and Babuska and Melenk (1997) ). 
PUFEM is a powerful method because it can be used to construct FE spaces of any given regularity, 
which is a generalization of the h, p, and hp version s of the finite element method , as well as 
providing the ability to embed an analytic solution into the F EM discretization instead of relying 
upon a generic polynomial interpolant.  
A significant breakthrough  in computational fracture mechanics and finite element  refinement  
technology came in the late 1990s, when Ted Belytschko and his co -workers , including  T. Black, 
N. Mo es, and J. Dolbow, developed the eXtended finite element (X -FEM)  (see Belytschko and 
Black (1999), and  Moës et al.  (1999 )), which uses various enriched discontinuous shape functions 
to accurately capture  the morphology of a cracked body without remeshing. Because  the adaptive 
enrichment process is governed by the crack tip energy release rate,  X-FEM provides an accurate 
solution for linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM).  In inventing  X-FEM, Ted Belytschko   
brilliantly utilized  the concept  PUFEM in solving fracture mechanics prob lems without remeshing . 
Entering the new millennium, A. Karma and his co -workers (Karma et al. [2000 ]) proposed the 
phase -field finite element method to solve crack growth and crack propagation problems, as the 
phase field method can accurately predict material damage for brittle fracture. Some of the leading 
contributors for this research topic are B. Bourdin, TJR. Hughes, C. Kuhn, R. Muller, C. Miehe, 
CM. Landis,  among others.  
 
As mentioned before, the main reason for the huge success of finite element methods is their broad 
applica bility to engineering analysis and design  across scientific disciplines . On the other hand, 
most  mechanical engineering desig ns are performed by using various computer -aided design 
(CAD) tools, such as solid mo deling. To directly blend the finite element method into CAD design 
tools, TJR. Hughes and his co -
workers  such as JA Cottrell and Y. 
Bazilevs (Hughes et al. (2005), 
Cottrell et al. (2009))  developed the 
isogeometric analysis (IGA) finite 
element method, which established 
the Galerkin variational weak 
formulation in the control mesh and 
uses the Non-uniform ra tional basis 
spline (NURBS)  functions as the 
FEM shape function to solve the 
problem at design stage .  


 
14 
  
Due to the emergence of nanotechnology , various m ultiscale methods  have been developed to 
couple atomistic methods such as molecular dynamics and densit y functional theory (DFT) and 
other ab initio methods with continuum scale finite element methods. The most notable 
contributions in this area are hand -shake method  (F.F. Abraham, J. Q. Broughton, N. Bernstein, 
and E. Kaxiras  (1998 )) quasi -continuum finite element method  (E. B. Tadmor, M. Ortiz, R. Phillips 
(1996 )), and the bridging scale method  developed by G . Wagner and WK. Liu (2003), which is an 
ingenious use of the Mori -Zwanzig formalism in multiscale coupling technique . In 2007, V. Gavini, 
K. Bhattacharya, and M. Ortiz developed quasi -continuum orbital -free density -functional theory 
(DFT) finite element formulation for multi -million atom DFT calculations.  (Gavini et al. ( 2007)). 
 
Relatedly, there has been a rapid development in computational homogenization methods  since 
the late 1990s, which is an alternate approach to obtaining continuum -scale properties based on 
smaller scale microstructures . The computational homogenization method or the finite element 
homogenization methods f or composite materials may be divided into two main categories: (1) 
Computational asymptotic homogenization method or multiscale computational homogenization, 
which is aimed for modeling composite materials with periodic microstructure . The pioneer of 
multiscale homogenization finite element method may be credited to TY Hou and his co -workers 
(1997),  and other  earlier contributors are N. Kikuchi , S. Ghosh , J. Fish and M. S. Shephard ; and 
(2) Computational micromechanics method, which is mainly aimed for composite materials with 
random microstructure, even though it may also be applied to materials with periodic 
microstructure, where  the main contributors are: P. Suquet and his collea gues at the French 
National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS), G. J. Dvorak (1994) and J. Fish at Rensselaer 
Polytechnic Institute and C. Miehe  (1999)  and his group at the University of Stuttgart.  During 
the same period, many novel FEM fluid -structure interaction solvers have been developed, for 
instance, the immersed finite element method developed by L. Zhang and her co -workers  (2004) , 
which was motivated by the immersed boundary method pioneered by C. Peskin  of Courant 
Institute of Mathematical Scien ces, New York University.  
 
An important finite element application area emerged with the developments of computational 
plasticity. The early finite element computational plasticity formulation is based on hypoelastic -
plastic rate formulation. To satisfy the objectivity requirement, TJR Hughes and J. Winget first 
proposed  the so -called  incremental objectivity (1980) , which was in the first time the esoteric 
continuum mechanics theory was applied to finite element formulations and computations,  and it 
in turn promoted the development of nonlinear continuum mechanics in 1980s and 1990s . Soon 
afterwards.  Simo and Hughes then extended Hughes -Winget i ncremental objectivity algorithm to 
finite deformation case in computational plasticity.  The notion of consistency between the tangent 
stiffness matrix and the integration algorithm employed in the solution of the incremental problem 
was introduced by Nagt egaal (1982) and Simo and Taylor (1985). Consistent formulations have 
been subsequently developed for finite deformation plasticity by Sim o and Oritz  (1985,1988)  
within the framework of multiplicative decomposition of the deformation gradient and 
hyperelas ticity . Also in 1980s, based on the Gurson’s model, Tverga ard and Needleman (1984) 
developed the finite element based Gurson -Tvergaard -Needleman model, which is probably the 
most widely used  finite element computational plasticity constitutive model used in material 
modeling, though recently attention has turned to develo ping machine -learning based or data -
driven computational plasticity models e.g., E. Chinesta, et al (2017 ), and the unsuper vised 

 
15 
 machine learning data -driven finite element methods, call Self -consistent Clustering Analysis 
(SCA), by Z. Liu et al . (2016 , 2018 ).  
 
An important advance of finite element method is the development of crystal plasticity finite 
element method (CPFEM), which was first introduced in a landmark paper by D. Piece, RJ Asaro, 
and A. Needleman in 1982. In the past almost four decades, there are a numbers of people who 
have significant contributions to the subject, for example, A. Arsenlis and DM. Park s from MIT 
and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (1999,2002,2004); PR. Dawson and his colleagues 
at Cornell University (1989,2011), and D. Raabe and his colleagues at Max -Planck -Institute fur 
Eisenforschung (2003,2004,2006), among others . Based on cry stal slip, CPFEM can calculate 
dislocation, crystal orientation and other texture information to consider crystal anisotropy during 
computations, and it has been applied to simulate crystal plasticity deformation, surface roughness, 
fractures and so on. Re cently, S. Li and his co -workers developed a finite element based multiscale 
dislocation pattern dynamics to model crystal plasticity in single crystal (2019).  Yu et al., (2019) 
reformulated the self -consistent clustering analysis (SCA) for general elasto -viscoplastic materials 
under finite deformation. The accuracy and efficiency for predicting overall mechanical response 
of polycrystalline materials is demonstrated with a comparison to traditional full -field finite 
element methods.  
 
In 2013, a group of It alian scientists and engineers led by L. Beirão da Veiga and F.  Brezzi 
proposed a so -called virtual element method (VEM). The virtual element method is an extension 
of the conventional finite element method for arbitrary element geometries. It allows polytopal 
discretizations (polygons in 2 -D or polyhedra in 3 -D), which may be even  highly irregular and 
non-convex element domains. The name  virtual  derives from the fact that knowledge of the local 
shape function basis is not required, and it is in fact never  explicitly calculated.  VEM possesses 
features that make it superior to the conventional FEM for some special problems such as the 
problems with complex geometries for which a good quality mesh is difficult to obtain, solutions 
that require very local refi nements, and among others. In these special cases, VEM demonstrates 
robustness and accuracy in numerical calculations, when the mesh is distorted.  
 
As early as 1957, R. Clough introduce d the first graduate finite element course in UC -Berkeley, 
and since then finite element courses at both graduate and undergraduate levels have been added 
into engineering higher education curriculums in all the major engineering schools and 
Universities al l over the world.  As JT Oden recalled in his 1963 paper, `` I went on to return to 
academia in 1964 and among my first chores was to develop a graduate course on finite element 
methods. At the same time, I taught mathematics and continuum mechanics, and it became clear 
to me that finite elements and digital computing offered hope of transforming nonlinear continuum 
mechanics from a qualitative and academic subject into something useful in modern scientific 
computing and engineering .’’ 
By the end of 2015, the re have  been more than several hundred of finite element methods 
monographs and textbooks published in dozen s of languages worldwide. An exposition of finite  
element mathematical theory by Strang and Fix [1972] was among the earliest of those FEM books. 
JT Oden and his collaborators such as JN Reddy and GF Carey wrote a five-volume  finite element 
monographs in  late 1970s and early 1980s. Other FEM books such as those  by Zienkiewicz and 
Cheung, or later Zienkiewicz and Taylor;  Cook, Malkus, Plesha, and Witt ; TJR. Hughes ; KJ. Bathe, 
and the Nonlinear FEM monographs  by Belytschko, Liu, and Moran (1999 ) and by De Borst, 

 
16 
 Crisfield, Remmers, and Verhoosel (2012 ), among others, all have  made  major impacts on FEM 
educations and applications. Among all these FEM monographs and textbooks, the book by  
Zienkiewicz and Taylor or Zienkiewicz, Taylor, and Zhu probably has had most impacts on FEM 
technology popularization, which  may be because  R. L. Taylor wrote a FEM research computer 
program code named  FEAP , which was placed in  the appendix of that  book, providing an 
immediate guidance on hands -on experience  of implementing FEM  for the readers.  
 
The development of finite element software technology started in the 1960s.  In 1963 , E.L. Wilson 
and R. Clough developed a structural mechanics FEM code called Symbolic Matrix Interpretive 
System, SMIS, and then  Wilson  initiated and develop ed a general -purpose static and dynamic 
Structural Analysis Program , SAP.  In late 1960s and the early 1970s,  KJ. Bathe developed 
nonlinear FEM code ADINA based on SAP IV and NONSAP.  Today, the brand name SAP2000 
has become synonymous with the state -of-the-art finite element structural analysis and design 
methods since its introduction over 5 5 years ago.  At the same period, NASA developed its own 
FEM code called NASTRAN . About the sam e time in late 1960s,  J. Swanson  asked his employer 
Westinghouse to develop FEM computer code, and his suggestion was rejected, and then he left 
the company and  developed the initial ANSYS FEM code. Several years later, J .O. Hallquist at 
Lawrence Live rmore  National Laboratory also developed a 3D nonlinear FEM code called 
DYNA3D, which later evolved  to LS -DYNA.   By th e end of 1990s and early 2000s , and FEM 
software industry  has become a multi -billion -dollar  business . There were several household finite 
element  software  company names such as ANSYS, AB AQUS, ADINA, LS-DYNA, NASTRAN, 
COMSOL Multiphysics, CSI, a mong  others. Today, there are also a plethora of  open -source FEM 
software available online, such as FreeFEM, OpenSees, Elmer, FEBio, FEniCS Project, D UNE, 
among some others.  
 
IV. (2018 - present) Coming of A New Era 
The modern form of the finite element method can routinely solve many industrial problems. They 
enable fundamental understanding and allow predictive analysis for product design. For new 
scientif ic discovery and engineering innovation, the development of new scientific principles often 
trails the pace of new inventions with the sheer volume of data that are generated across multiple 
spatial, temporal, and design parameters (spatial -temporal -parame ter) spaces.  For this reason, FE 
researchers are studying various forms of machine and deep learning methods, of which this class 
of methods cover the largest class of interpolations. According to the universal approximation 
theorem, a neural network (NN) can be designed and trained to approximate any given continuous 
function to desired accuracy [Selmic and Lewis (2002) , Hashash  et al. (2004) ] which is believed 
to drive new discoveries and enable future computational discretization technologie s. In this 
context, Mechanistic Data Science (MDS) finite element methods, which combine known 
scientific principles with newly collected data, will provide the critically needed research that can 
be a boon for new inventions.  
 
Scientific and engineering problems typically fall under three categories: (1) problems with 
abundant data but undeveloped or unavailable scientific principles, (2) problems that have limited 
data and limited scientific knowledge, and (3) problems that have known scientific principl es with 
uncertain parameters, with possible high computational load (Saha et al., 2021 ). In essence, 
mechanistic data science (MDS) mimics the way human  civilization has discovered solutions to 
difficult and unsolvable problems from the beginning of time. Instead of heuristics, MDS uses 

 
17 
 machine learning methods like active deep learning and hierarchical neural network(s) to process 
input data, extract mechanistic features, reduce dimensions, learn hidden relationships through 
regression and classification, and provide a knowledge database. The resulting reduced order form 
can be utilized for design and optimization of new scientific and engineering systems  (Liu et. al., 
2021) .  Thus, the new focus of the finite element research has shifted towards the develo pment 
of machine learning based finite element methods and reduced order models.  
 
With the recent development of machine 
learning and deep learning methods, 
solving FEM by constructing a deep 
neural network has become a state -of-the-
art technology. Earlier research focused 
on building up a shallow neural network 
following the FEM structure to solve 
boundary problems. J. Takeuchi and Y. 
Kosugi in 1993 proposed a neural 
network representation of the finite 
element method to solve Poisson eq uation problems. G. Yagawa and O. Aoki (1995) replaced 
the FEM functional with the network energy of interconnected neural networks (NNs) to solve 
a heat conduction problem. Due to the limitation of computational power and slow convergency 
rate in shallow neural networks, earlier applications could only solve simple PDE problems. 
After the 2010s, neural networks for solving computational mechanics problems has become 
increasingly popular  the rapid growth of deep learning techniques and the development of mo re 
sophisticated neural network structures, such as convolutional neural networks (CNN), 
Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN), residual neural networks (ResNet).  For its high 
dimensional regression ability, some researchers, for example, F. Ghavamiana an d A. Simone 
(2019), use deep neural network as a regression model to learn the material behavior or 
microstructure response. Other works focus on solving PDEs using deep learning neural 
networks. G. Karniadakis and his coworkers (2017, 2019, 2021) proposed  a Physics -Informed 
Neural Networks (PINNs) to solve high dimensional PDEs in strong form that with constraints 
to accommodate both natural and essential boundary conditions. The idea of constructing deep 
neural network following the FEM structure is inves tigated again with advanced neural network 
methodology. Weinan E and B. Yu (2017) proposed a Deep Ritz Method for solving variational 
problems. J. Sirignano and K. Spiliopoulos (2018) proposed the so -called Deep Galerkin Method 
(DGM) to solve high -dimensio nal PDEs. Zabaras and his coworkers (2019) proposed a CNN -
based physics -constrained deep learning framework for high -dimensional surrogate modeling 
and uncertainty quantification. T. Rabczuk and his coworkers (2020) systematically explore the 
potential to use NNs for computational mechanics by solving energetic format of the PDE. N. 
Trask and his coworkers (2021) proposed a partition of unity network for deep hp approximation 
of PDEs and extensively the training and initialization strategy to accelerate the  convergence of 
the solution process. The constructing of element shape function by activation functions has been 
studied by J. Opschoor and his coworkers (2017) and J. He and his coworkers (2020).  
 
Inspired by the universal approximation of deep neural n etworks (DNN), Zhang et al. (2020) 
published the first paper on the construction of the conventional finite element shape functions 
based in the hierarchical nature of the DNN , called Hierarchical Deep-learning Neural Networks 


 
18 
 (HiDeNN) . Specifically, the authors demonstrated the construction of a few class es of deep 
learning interpolation functions , such as  the reproducing kernel particle method (RKPM), non-
uniform rational B -spline (NURBS), and isogeometric analysis (IGA), among other 
approximation techniques . Saha et al.  (2021) generalized HiDeNN to a unified Artificial 
intelligence (AI) -framework, called HiDeNN -AI. HiDeNN -AI can assimilate many data -driven 
tools in an appropriate way, which provides a general approach to solve challenging science and 
engineering problems with little or no available physics as well as with extreme computational 
demand.    
 
To reduce the FE computational cost, the so -called two -stage data -driven methods have been 
proposed of which during the offline stage, a data base generated by the finite element methods 
is first developed, and the final solutions are computed during the o nline stage. C. Farhat and his 
group at Stanford University have developed several  dimensional reduction of nonlinear finite 
element dynamic models , including mesh sampling and weighting for the hyper reduction  of 
nonlinear Petrov‐Galerkin reduced‐order mo dels. To further reduce the finite element 
computational burden, Z. Liu et. al.,  (2016) applied the unsupervised machine learning 
technique s, such as the k -mean clustering method to group the material points  during the offline 
stage and  obtain the final solutions by solving the reduced -ordered Lippmann -Schwinger 
micromechanics equations . This class of data -driven approaches circumvents the computational 
burden of the well-established  FE square method,  the offline -online database approach to solve 
the concurrent FEM problems . They named the method  the Finite Element -self-consistent 
clusteri ng analysis (FE -SCA) of which the computational cost of the microscale analysis is 
reduced tremendously  in multiple orders of magnitude speed up . J. Gao proposed an alternative 
(FE-SCAxSCA…xSCA) clustering analysis, of which the continuum finite element scale is 
concurrently solved with the (n -1) coupled -scale Lippmann -Schwinger micromechanics 
equations ( Gao, 2020).  
 
M. Ortiz and his group at Caltech developed data -driven finite element s for dynamics and noise 
data.  J. -S. Chen and his co -workers have developed a physics -constrained data -driven RKPM 
method based on locally convex reconstruction for noisy database s (He and Chen 2020) . S. Li 
and his group at UC -Berkeley utilized finite element solution generated data to develop a 
machine learning based inverse solution to predict pre -crash data of car collision. Bessa et al ., 
(2017) proposed a data -driven framework to address the longstanding challenge of a two -scale 
analysis and design of materials under uncertainty  applicable to problems that involve 
unacceptable computational expense when solved by standard FEM analysis of representative 
volume elements. The paper defined a framework that incorporates the SCA method to build large 
databas es suitable for machine learning. The authors believe that this will open new avenues to 
finding innovative materials with new capabilities in an era of high -throughput computing (“big -
data”).  
 
Reduced order modeling has been another active research field over the last decades. Early 
research works focus ed on the proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) method (also known as 
Karhunen -Loève transform, or principal component analysis) with the purpose of reducing the 
degrees of freedom of the discretized equatio ns. The POD based model reduction has shown great 
success in computational fluid dynamics, see e.g., the works of P . Holmes and  J . L. Lumley (1993). 
For further accelerating the simulations, K . Willcox and her coworkers ( 2008, 2002) proposed a 

 
19 
 missing point estimation method, which is known later as a hyper reduction method. Other notable 
works related to POD and hyper reduction methods are the Gauss –Newton with approximated 
tensors (GNAT) method, Grassmann manifold based reduce d basis adaptation, thanks to C . Farhat 
and his coworkers (2008, 2013). For solid mechanics, D . Ryckelynck and his group (2005) 
proposed a hyper reduction method based on FEM for dealing with nonlinear problems. Another 
type of model reduction method, whic h is based on mathematics and has a rigorous error bound 
estimate, is called reduced basis method, as proposed by Y . Maday and E . M Rønquist (2002). The 
proper generalized decomposition (PGD) based model reduction, as an extension of POD, can be 
dated back  to 1980s, and it was introduced by P . Ladevèze (1985) under the name of radial time -
space approximation. F . Chinesta and his coworkers (2005, 2013) developed a PGD method to 
account for the parameter space, aiming at building offline computational vademec um for fast 
online predictions. It is noted that PGD methods are based on the idea of separation of variables 
and in particular a canonical tensor decompostion (CD). Zhang et al. (2021) consolidated the 
various attributes of the PGD methods with HiDeNN. The proposed HiDeNN -PGD method  and 
the general reduced order machine learning finite element framework (Lu et al. 2021) provide 
powful tools for sovling large scale high dimensional problems.  
 
The development of model reduction methods meets the urgent deman d in the industry for fast and 
nearly real time simulations of engineering problems, such as online dynamic system control, 
structural health monitoring , vehicle health monitoring, on-line advanced manufacturing feedback 
control, automated driving controls and decisions, etc. Such applications usually require an 
intensive interaction between sensors, control algorithms, and simulation tools. Practical optimal 
control may require a re liable prediction within the range of milli - or sub -milli -second. Reducing 
the computation cost of simulations has been one of the major motivations for developing model 
reduction methods. Other reduced order modeling related topics are the feature enginee ring and 
data analytics, which constitute an extensive literature in field of machine learning. Thus, the 
reduced order modeling and the machine learning have intrinsic connections. Developing reduced 
order machine learning methods may enable physics -data combined models that can overcome the 
current bottleneck in model reduction methods and purely data -driven machine learning 
approaches.   
 
Acknowledgement s 
The authors w ould like  to acknowledg e the sources of some historic facts  cited  in this paper , which  
are taken from the following finite element history articles and books : 
 
1. Oden, J.T. (1990). Historical comments on finite elements. In   A history of scientific 
computing  , 152 -166. 
2. Lax, P. (1993). Feng Kang . SIAM News , 26(11).  
3. Clough, R.W. and Wilson, E.L.  (1999 ), August. Early finite element research at Berkeley. 
In Fifth US National Conference on Computational Mechanics , 1-35. 
4. Felippa, C.A.  (2004). Introduction to finite element methods.  University of Colorado , 885. 
5. Owen, D.R.J. and Feng, Y.T. (2012). Fifty years of finite elements —a solid mechanics 
perspective.  Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters , 2(5), p.051001.  
6. Stein, E. (2014). History of the finite element method –mathematics meets mechanics –part 
I: Engineering developments. In  The History of Theoretical, Material and Computational 

 
20 
 Mechanics -Mathematics Meets Mechanics and Engineering  (pp. 399 -442). Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg.  
7. Clough, R.W.  (1980 ). The finite element method after twenty -five years: a  personal 
view.  Computers & Structures , 12(4), 361 -370. 
8. Wikipedia: Finite Element Method, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Finite_element_method  
  

 
21 
 References  
Ainsworth, M., and Oden, J.T.  (1997).  A posteriori error estimation in finite element 
analysis.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 142(1-2), 1-88. 
Ainsworth, M. and Senior, B. (1998). An adaptive refinement strategy for hp -finite element 
computations.  Applied Numerical Mathematics , 26(1-2), 165 -178. 
Ainsworth, M., and Oden, J.T.  (2000). A posteriori error estimation in finite element analysis,  
John Wiley & Sons . 
Ammar, A., Mokdad, B., Chinesta, F., and Keunings, R.  (2006). A new family of solvers for some 
classes of multidimensional partial differential equations enco untered in kinetic theory modeling 
of complex fluids. Journal of non -Newtonian fluid Mechanics , 139(3),153-176. 
Amsallem, D. and Farhat, C.  (2008).  Interpolation method for adapting reduced -order models and 
application to aeroelasticity.  AIAA journal , 46(7), 1803 -1813.  
Amsallem, D., & Farhat, C. (2008). Interpolation method for adapting reduced -order models and 
application to aeroelasticity. AIAA journal, 46(7) ,1803 -1813.  
Andelfinger, U. and Ramm, E.  (1993).  EAS‐elements for two‐dimensional, three‐dimensional, 
plate and shell structures and their equivalence to HR‐elements.  International journal for 
numerical methods in enginee ring, 36(8), 1311 -1337.  
Argyris, JH.  (1954).  Energy Theorems and Structural Analysis, Aircraft Engineering, 26, 347 -356 
(Oct. 1954), 383 -387, 394 (Nov.).  
Argyris, JH. (1955).  Energy Theorems and Structural Analysis, Aircraft Engineering, 27, 42 -58 
(Feb.), 80-94 (March), 125 -134 (April), 145 -158 (May 1955).  
Argyris, JH. (1965). Continua and Discontinua, Proceedings, Conference on Matrix Methods in 
Structural Mechanics, Preziemiencki et al. (Eds.), AFFDL -TR-66-80, (Oct. 26 -28, 1965), Wright -
Patterson AFB, Ohi o, 11 -190. 
Arnold, D., Falk, R. and Winther, R. (2010). Finite element exterior calculus: from Hodge theory 
to numerical stability.  Bulletin of the American mathematical society , 47(2), 281 -354. 
Arsenlis A, and Parks DM. (1999). Crystallographic aspects of geometrically -necessary and 
statistically -stored dislocation density. Acta Mater . 47(5), 1597 –611. 
Arsenlis A, and Parks DM. (2002). Modeling the evolution of crystallographic dislocation density 
in crystal plasticity. J Mech P hys Solids. 50(9), 1979 –2009.  
Arsenlis, A., Parks, D.M., Becker, R. and Bulatov, V.V. (2004). On the evolution of 
crystallographic dislocation density in non -homogeneously deforming crystals.  Journal of the 
Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 52(6), 1213 -1246 . 
Astrid, P., Weiland, S., Willcox, K.,  and Backx, T. (2008). Missing point estimation in models 
described by proper orthogonal decomposition. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 53(10), 
2237 -2251.  
Atluri, S.N. and Zhu, T. (1998). A new meshless local Petrov -Galerkin (MLPG) approach in 
computational mechanics.  Computational mechanics , 22(2) 117 -127. 
Aubin, J.P. (1967). Behavior of the Error of the Approximate Solutions of Boundary -Value 
Problems for Linear Elliptic Operators by Galerkin's Method and Fin ite Differences, Annali della 
Scuola Normale di Pisa, Series 3, 21 , 599-637. 
Aziz, A.K. (1972). Editor of The Mathematical Foundations of the Finite Element Method with 
Applications to Partial Differential Equations, Academic Press, N.Y.  
Babuska, I. (1976). Finite Element Methods for Domains with Corners, Computing, 6, 264 -273. 

 
22 
 Babushka, I. and Aziz, AK. (1972). Survey Lectures on the Mathematical Foundation of the Finite 
Element Method", Aziz, AK. (Ed.)  The Mathematical Foundation of the Finite Elem ent Method 
with Applications to Partial Differential Equations, Academic Press, N.Y. 5 -359. 
Babuska, I. Oden, TJ. And Lee, JK. (1977). Mixed -Hybrid Finite Element Approximations of 
Second -Order Elliptic Boundary -Value Problems, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 
Engineering, 11, 175 -206. 
Babuska , I. (1971). Error bounds for the finite element method, Numerische Math., 16, 322-333. 
Babuska, I.,  Szabo, B.A., and Kat, I.N. (1981 ). The p -Version of the Finite Element Method, SIAM 
J. Numer. An l., 18, 515 -544. 
Babuska, I.,  Szabo, BA., and Kat, IN. (1982). On the Rates of Convergence of the Finite Element 
Method, Int. J. Numer. Meth.Engng.,  18, 323-341.  
Babuška, I. and Melenk, J.M.  (1997 ). The partition of unity method.  International journal for 
numerical method s in engineering , 40(4), pp.727 -758. 
Baumann, C.E. and Oden, J.T. (1999). A discontinuous hp finite element method for convection —
diffusion problems.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 175(3-4), 311 -
341. 
Belytschko, T. and Black, T.  (1999 ). Elastic crack growth in finite elements with minimal 
remeshing.  International journal for numerical methods in engineering , 45(5), 601 -620. 
Bazant, Z.P., Belytschko, T.B. and Chang, T.P.  (1984 ). Continuum theory for strain -
softening.  Journal of Engi neering Mechanics , 110(12), pp.1666 -1692.  
Bažant, Z.P. and Chang, T.P., 1987. Nonlocal finite element analysis of strain -softening 
solids.  Journal of engineering mechanics , 113(1), pp.89 -105. 
Beirão da Veiga, L., Brezzi, F., Cangiani, A., Manzini, G., Marini, L.D. and Russo, A. (2013). 
Basic principles of virtual element methods.  Mathematical Models and Methods in Applied 
Sciences , 23(01), 199 -214. 
Beirão da Veiga, L., Brezzi, F., Marini, L.D. and Russo, A. (2014). The hitchhiker's guide to the 
virtual element method.  Mathematical models and methods in applied sciences , 24(08), pp.1541 -
1573.  
Belytschko, T., Lu, Y.Y. and Gu, L. (1994). Element‐free Galerkin methods.  International 
journal for nume rical methods in engineering , 37(2), 229 -256. 
Belytschko, T. and Black, T. (1999). Elastic crack growth in finite elements with minimal 
remeshing, International journal for numerical methods in engineering , 45(5), 601 -620. 
Belytschko, T., Liu, W.K., Moran, B. and Elkhodary, K.  (2013). Nonlinear finite elements for 
continua and structures , John Wiley & sons.  
Bennett, J.A. and Botkin, M.E. (1985). Structural shape optimization with geometric description 
and adaptive mesh refin ement.  AIAA journal , 23(3), 458 -464. 
Berkooz, G., Holmes, P., & Lumley, J. L. (1993). The proper orthogonal decomposition in the 
analysis of turbulent flows. Annual review of fluid mechanics , 25(1), 539 -575. 
Bessa, M.A., Bostanabad, R., Liu, Z., Hu, A., Apley, D.W., Brinson, C., Chen, W. and Liu, W.K. 
(2017), A framework for data -driven analysis of materials under uncertainty: Countering the curse 
of dimensionality.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 320, 633 -667. 
Best, G. and Oden, J.  (1963). Stiffness matrices for shell -type structures, Research & Engineering 
Department, General Dynamics, Fort Worth.  
Birkhoff, G. (1969). Piecewise bicubic interpolation and approximation in polygons, in 
approximations with special emphasis on spline fu nctions, edited by I. J Shoenberg, Academic 
Press, New York, 85 -121. 

 
23 
 Bischoff, M. and Ramm, E. (199 8). Shear deformable shell elements for large strains and 
rotations.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 40(23),4427 -4449.  
Borden, M. J., Verhoosel, C.V., Scott, M.,A., Hughes, T.J., and Landis, C.M. (2012). A phase -field 
description of dynamic brittle fracture.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 
Engineering , 217, 77-95. 
Botkin, M.E. (1982). Shape optimization of plate and shell s tructures.  AIAA Journal , 20(2), 268 -
273. 
Bramble JH, Nitsche JA, Schatz AH. (1975). Maximum -norm interior estimates for Ritz -Galerkin 
methods. Mathematics of Computation. 29(131), 677 -88. 
Brocca, M. and Bažant, Z.P. (2001). Size effect in concrete columns: finite -element analysis with 
microplane model.  Journal of Structural Engineering , 127(12), pp.1382 -1390.  
Brooks, A.N. and Hughes, T.J. (1982). Streamline upwind/Petrov -Galerkin formulations for 
convection dominated flows with particular emphasis o n the incompressible Navier -Stokes’s  
equations.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 32(1-3), 199 -259. 
Carlberg, K., Farhat, C., Cortial, J., & Amsallem, D. (2013). The GNAT method for nonlinear 
model reduction: effective implementation a nd application to computational fluid dynamics and 
turbulent flows. Journal of Computational Physics, 242 (2013) 623 -647. 
Caner, F.C. and Bažant, Z.P. (2009). Size effect on strength of laminate -foam sandwich plates: 
Finite element analysis with interface fracture.  Composites Part B: Engineering , 40(5), pp.337 -
348. 
Carey, G.F. and Oden, T.J. (1986). Finite Elements: Fluid Mechanics Vol., VI . Prentice -Hall, Inc.  
Cybenko, G. (1989). Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function, Mathematics of 
Control, Signals and Systems 2 (4), 303 –314. 
Chen, J.S., Wu, C.T., Yoon, S. and You, Y.  (2001 ). A stabilized conforming nodal integration 
for Galerkin mesh‐free methods.  International journal for numerical methods in  engineering,  
50(2), 435 -466. 
Chen, Q., Xie, Y., Ao, Y., Li, T., Chen, G., Ren, S., Wang, C. and Li, S. (2021). A deep neural 
network inverse solution to recover pre -crash impact data of car collisions, Transportation 
Research Part C,  126, 103009.  
Chinesta, F., Leygue, A., Bordeu, F., Aguado, J. V., Cueto, E., González, D., ... and Huerta, A. 
(2013). PGD -based computational vademecum for efficient design, optimization and control. 
Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering , 20(1), 31 -59. 
Chine sta, F., Ladeveze, P., Ibanez, R., Aguado, J.V., Abisset -Chavanne, E. and Cueto, E. (2017). 
Data -driven computational plasticity.  Procedia engineering , 207, 209 -214. 
Clough, R.W.  (1960 ). The finite element method in plane stress analysis. In  Proceedings of 2nd 
ASCE Conference on Electronic Computation, Pittsburgh Pa., Sept. 8 and 9, 1960 . 
Clough, R.W.  (1962 ) The stress distribution of Norfork Dam . California Univ Berkeley Inst of 
Engineering Research.  
Clough, R.W. and Wilson, E.L. (1999). August. Early finite element research at Berkeley. In  Fifth 
US National Conference on Computational Mechanics ,1-35. 
Cottrell, J.A., Hughes, T.J. and Bazilevs, Y., 2009.  Isogeometric analysis: toward integration of 
CAD and FEA . John Wiley & Sons.  
Courant, R. (1943). Variational methods for the solution of problems of equilibrium and vibrations, 
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society . 49, 1 –23. 
De Borst, R. (1991). Simulation of strain localization: a reappraisal of the Cosserat 
continuum.  Engineering computations . 8 (4), 317 -332.    

 
24 
 De Borst, R. and Mühlhaus, H.B. (1992). Gradient‐dependent plasticity: formulation and 
algorithmic aspects.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 35(3) 521 -539. 
De Borst, R., Cri sfield, M.A., Remmers, J.J. and Verhoosel, C.V. (2012).  Nonlinear finite element 
analysis of solids and structures . John Wiley & Sons.  
Demkowicz, L., Oden, J.T., Rachowicz, W. and Hardy, O.  (1989 ). Toward a universal hp adaptive 
finite element strategy, Part 1. Constrained approximation and data structure.  Computer Methods 
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 77(1-2), pp.79 -112. 
Demkowicz, L., Oden, J.T. and Rachowicz, W. (1990). A new finite element method for solving 
compressible Navier -Stoke s equations based on an operator splitting method and hp 
adaptivity.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 84(3), pp.275 -326. 
Demkowicz, L., Monk, P., Vardapetyan, L. and Rachowicz, W. (2000). De Rham diagram for hp 
finite element spaces.  Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 39(7-8), 29 -38. 
Dietsche, A., Steinmann, P. and Willam, K. (1993). Micropolar elastoplasticity and its role in 
localization.  International Journal of Plasticity , 9(7), 813 -831. 
Donea, J., Giuliani, S. and Halleux, J.P., (1982). An arbitrary Lagrangian -Eulerian finite element 
method for transient dynamic fluid -structure interactions.  Computer methods in applied mechanics 
and engineering , 33(1-3), pp.689 -723. 
Donea, J. and Huerta, A.  (2003 ). Finite element methods for flow problems . John Wiley & Sons.  
Donea, J., Huerta, A., Ponthot, J.P. and Rodríguez‐Ferran, A.  (2017 ). Arbitrary Lagrangian –E 
ulerian Methods.  Encyclopedia of Computational Mechanics Second Edition , 1-23. 
Dvorak, G.J., Wafa, A.M. and Bahei -El-Din, Y.A. (1994). Implementation of the transformation 
field analysis for inelastic composite materials.  Computational mechanics , 14(3), 201 -228. 
Dupont, T. (1973). L^2 -estimates for Galerkin methods for second order h yperbolic 
equations.  SIAM journal on numerical analysis , 10(5), pp.880 -889. 
Douglas, J. and Dupont, T. (1973). Superconvergence for Galerkin methods for the two point 
boundary problem via local projections.  Numerische Mathematik , 21(3), pp.270 -278. 
Farhat,  C. (1994). Implicit parallel processing in structural mechanics.  Comp. Mech. Advances , 2, 
1-124. 
Farhat, C., Avery, P., Chapman, T. and Cortial, J., (2014). Dimensional reduction of nonlinear 
finite element dynamic models with finite rotations and energy‐ based mesh sampling and 
weighting for computational efficiency.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in 
Engineering , 98(9), 625 -662. 
Feng, K. (1965). Variational principle -based finite difference formulation, Applied and 
Computational Mathematics , 2(4), 238 -262 (in Chinese),  
Fish, J. (1992). The s -version of the finite element method.  Computers & Structures , 43(3), 539 -
547. 
Fish, J., S hek, K., Pandheeradi, M. and Shephard, M.S. (1997). Computational plasticity for 
composite structures based on mathematical homogenization: Theory and practice.  Computer 
methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 148(1-2), 53 -73. 
Fleming, M, Chu, Y.A., Moran, B., and Belytschko, T. (1997). Enriched Element -Free Galerkin 
Methods for Crack Tip Fields. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 40, 
1483 -1504.  
Gao, J. (2020) Multiscale Modeling of Composite Laminate Structures: a Pathway Tow ards 
Predictive Science and Engineering, PhD dissertation, Northwestern University.  

 
25 
 Gavini, V., Bhattacharya, K. and Ortiz, M.  (2007 ). Quasi -continuum orbital -free density -
functional theory: A route to multi -million atom non -periodic DFT calculation.  Journal of the 
Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 55(4), 697 -718. 
Grimberg, S., Farhat, C., Tezaur, R. and Bou‐Mosleh, C. (2020). Mesh sampling and weighting 
for the hyper reduction of nonlinear Petrov‐Galerkin reduced‐order models with local re duced‐
order bases.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , Online.  
Hashash, Y.M.A., Jung, S. and Ghaboussi, J., (2004). Numerical implementation of a neural 
network based material model in finite element analysis.  International Journal for numerical 
methods in engineering , 59(7), pp.989 -1005.  
Hilber, H.M., Hughes, T.J. and Taylor, R.L. (1977). Improved numerical dissipation for time 
integration algorithms in structural dynamics.  Earthquake Engineering & Structural 
Dynamics , 5(3),  283-292. 
Hillerborg, A., Modéer, M. and Petersson, P.E.  (1976 ). Analysis of crack formation and crack 
growth in concrete by means of fracture mechanics and finite elements.  Cement and concrete 
research , 6(6),  773-781. 
Hrennikoff, A. (1941). Solution of problems of elasticity by the framework method.  Journal of 
Applied Mechanics.  8 (4): 169 –175. 
He, Q. and Chen, J -S (2020). A physics -constrained data -driven approach based on locally convex 
reconstruction for noisy database, Computer Methods in  Applied Mechanics and Engineering 363 
112791.  
Hornik, K, Stinchcombe, M. and White, H. et al. (1989) Multilayer feedforward networks are 
universal approximators., Neural Networks 2 (5), 359 –366. 
Imam, M.H. (1982) Three‐dimensional shape optimization.  International Journal for Numerical 
Methods in Engineering , 18(5),  661 -673. 
Hellinger, E., Klein, F. and Müller, C. (1914). Die allgemeinen Ansätzeder Mechanik der 
Kontinua.  Enr. Math. Wti. 4, 602 , 694. 
Holzapfel, G.A., Eberlein, R., Wriggers, P. and Weizsäcker, H.W. (1996). Large strain analysis of 
soft biological membranes: Formulation and finite element analysis.  Computer methods in applied 
mechanics and engineering , 132(1-2), 45 -61. 
Hou, T.Y. and Wu, X.H. (1997).  A multiscale finite element method for elliptic problems in 
composite materials and porous media.  Journal of computational physics , 134(1), pp.169 -189. 
Hu, H.C., 1955. On some variational principles in the theory of elasticity and plastic ity. Sci. Sin. , 4, 
33-54. 
Hughes, T.J., Taylor, R.L., Sackman, J.L., Curnier, A. and Kanoknukulchai, W. (1976). A finite 
element method for a class of contact -impact problems.  Computer methods in applied mechanics 
and engineering , 8(3), pp.249 -276. 
Hughes,  T.J. and Winget, J. (1980). Finite rotation effects in numerical integration of rate 
constitutive equations arising in large‐deformation analysis.  International journal for numerical 
methods in engineering , 15(12), 1862 -1867.  
Hughes, T.J. and Tezduyar, T.  (1981 ). Finite elements based upon Mindlin plate theory with 
particular reference to the four -node bilinear isoparametric element.  
Hughes, T.J. and Liu, W.K. (1981). Nonlinear finite element analysis of shells: Part I. Three -
dimensional shells . Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 26(3), 331 -362. 
Hughes, T.J., (2012).  The finite element method: linear static and dynamic finite element analysis . 
Courier Corporation.  

 
26 
 Hughes, T.J., Liu, W.K. and Zimmermann, T.K., (1981). Lagrangian -Eulerian finite element 
formulation for incompressible viscous flows.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and 
engineering , 29(3), 329 -349. 
Hughes, T.J., Mallet, M. and Akira, M.  (1986 ). A new finite element formulation for computational 
fluid dynamics: II. Beyond SUPG.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and 
engineering , 54(3), pp.341 -355. 
Hughes, T.J., Franca, L.P. and Mallet, M.  (1986 ). A new finite element formulation for 
computational fluid dynamics: I. Symmetric forms of the compressible Euler and Navier -Stokes 
equations and the second law of thermodynamics.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and 
engineering , 54(2), pp.223 -234. 
Hughes, TJR, Franca, LP, and Balestra, M. (1986). A new finite element formulation for 
computatio nal fluid dynamics: V. Circumventing the Babuška -Brezzi condition: A stable Petrov -
Galerkin formulation of the Stokes problem accommodating equal -order 
interpolations."  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering  59(1), 85 -99. 
Hughes, T.J.  (1995) . Multiscale phenomena: Green's functions, the Dirichlet -to-Neumann 
formulation, subgrid scale models, bubbles and the origins of stabilized methods.  Computer 
methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 127(1-4), 387 -401. 
Hughes, T.J., Cottrell, J .A. and Bazilevs, Y., (2005). Isogeometric analysis: CAD, finite elements, 
NURBS, exact geometry and mesh refinement.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and 
engineering , 194(39-41), 4135 -4195.  
Iordache, M.M. and Willam, K., (1998). Localized failure ana lysis in elastoplastic Cosserat 
continua, Computer  Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 151(3-4), pp.559 -586. 
Karma, A. and Lobkovsky, A.E., (2004). Unsteady crack motion and branching in a phase -field 
model of brittle fracture.  Physical review letters , 92(24), p.245510.  
Karma, A., Kessler, D.A. and Levine, H. (2001). Phase -field model of mode III dynamic 
fracture.  Physical Review Letters , 87(4),  045501.  
Kikuchi, N., Chung, K.Y., Torigaki, T. and Taylor, J.E., (1986). Adaptive finite elem ent methods 
for shape optimization of linearly elastic structures. In  the Optimum Shape,  139-169). Springer, 
Boston, MA.  
Kikuchi, N. and Oden, J.T. (1988).  Contact problems in elasticity: a study of variational 
inequalities and finite element methods . Soci ety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  
Kirchdoerfer, T. and Ortiz, M.(2017).  Data driven computing with noisy material data sets, 
Computer Methods in Applied 530 Mechanics and Engineering 326, 622 – 641.  
Kirchdoerfer, T. and Ortiz, M. (2018).  Data -driven computing in dynamics , International Journal 
for Numerical Methods in Engineering  113, 1697 –1710.  
Kuhn, C. and Müller, R. (2010). A continuum phase field model for fracture.  Engineering Fracture 
Mechanics , 77(18), 3625 -3634.  
Ladev`eze, P. (1985). New algorithms: mechanical framework and development (in French). 
Technical Report 57, LMT -Cachan.  
Lax, P. (1993). ``Kang Feng,’’ SIAM News 26(11)  page VII -VIII.  
Li, H., Kafka, O.L., Gao, J., Yu, C., Nie, Y., Zhang, L., Tajdari, M., Tang, S., Guo,  X., Li, G. and 
Tang, S. (2019). Clustering discretization methods for generation of material performance 
databases in machine learning and design optimization.  Computational Mechanics , 64(2), 281 -305. 
Li, S., Liu, W.K., Rosakis, A.J., Belytschko, T. and H ao, W. (2002). Mesh -free Galerkin 
simulations of dynamic shear band propagation and failure mode transition.  International Journal 
of solids and structures , 39(5),1213 -1240.  

 
27 
 Li, S., Ren, B. and Minaki, H.(2014). Multiscale crystal defect dynamics: a dual -lattice process 
zone model.  Philosophical Magazine , 94(13),1414 -1450.  
Liu, W.K., Belytschko, T. and Mani, A. (1986). Random field finite elements.  International 
journal for numerical methods in engineering , 23(10),1831 -1845.  
Liu, W.K., Jun, S. and Zhang, Y. F. (1995). Reproducing kernel particle methods.  International 
journal for numerical methods in fluids , 20(8‐9),1081 -1106.  
Liu, W. K., Jun, S., Li, S., Adee, J. and Belytschko, T. (1995). Reproducing kernel particle methods 
for structural dynamics.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering  38(10), 655 -
1679.  
Liu, Z., Bessa, M. A., and  Liu, W. K.  (2016).  Self-consistent clustering analysis: an efficient 
multi -scale scheme for inelastic heterogeneous materials. Computer Metho ds in Applied 
Mechanics and Engineering, 306 , 319-341. 
Liu, Z., Fleming, M. A., and  Liu, W. K. , (2018). Microstructural Material Database for Self -
consistent Clustering Analysis of Elastoplastic Strain Softening Materials. Comput. Methods Appl. 
Mech. Engr g., Volume 330 , Pages 547 -577. 
Liu, W. K., Gan, Z., Fleming, M. A., (2021) Mechanistic Data Science for STEM Education and 
Applic ations . Springer.  
Lubliner, J., Oliver, J., Oller, S. and Oñate, E.  (1989 ). A plastic -damage model for 
concrete.  International Journal of solids and structures , 25(3), 299 -326. 
Lu, Y., Li, H., Saha, S., Mojumder,  S., Amin , A., Suarez, D., Liu, Y., Qian, D., Liu, W. K., ( 2021)  
Reduced order machine learning finite element methods: concept,  implementation, and future 
applications . Computer Modeling in Engineering & Sciences , under review.  
Lyu, D. and Li, S. (2019). A multiscale dislocation pattern dyn amics: Towards an atomistic -
informed crystal plasticity theory.  Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids , 122. 613 -632. 
Maday, Y. and Rønquist, E. M. (2002). A reduced -basis element method. Journal of scientific 
computing , 17(1), 447 -459. 
Ma A, Roters F. and Raabe D.(2006). A dislocation density based constitutive model for crystal 
plasticity FEM including geometrically nec essary dislocations. Acta Mater, 54, 2169 –79. 
Mathur, K.K. and Dawson, P.R. (1989). On modeling the development of crystallographic texture 
in bulk forming processes.  International Journal of Plasticity , 5(1), .67 -94. 
Melenk, J.M. and Babuška, I.  (1996 ). The partition of unity finite element method: basic theory 
and applications.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 139(1-4), pp.289 -314. 
McHenry, D. (1943). A lattice analogy for the solution of stress problems,  Journal of the institution 
of civil engineers , 21(2), 59 -82. 
Mizukami, A. and Hughes, T.J.  (1985 ). A Petrov -Galerkin finite element method for convection -
dominated flows: an accurate upwinding  technique for satisfying the maximum 
principle.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 50(2), 181 -193. 
Moës, N., Dolbow, J. and Belytschko, T.  (1999 ). A finite element method for crack growth without 
remeshing.  International journal for nu merical methods in engineering , 46(1), 131 -150. 
Miehe, C., Schröder, J. and Schotte, J. (1999). Computational homogenization analysis in finite 
plasticity simulation of texture development in polycrystalline materials.  Computer methods in 
applied mechanics and engineering , 171(3-4), 387 -418. 
Miehe, C., Hofacker, M. and Welschinger, F. (2010). A phase field model for rate -independent 
crack propagation: Robust algorithmic implementation based on operator splits.  Computer 
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 199(45-48) , 2765 -2778.  

 
28 
 Moës, N., Dolbow, J. and Belytschko, T. (1999). A finite element method for crack growth without 
remeshing.  International journal for numerical methods in engineering , 46(1), 131 -150. 
Oden, J.T. (1963). Analysis of thin plates supported at their corners : Prepared for Office of 
Engineering Research, College of Engineering , School of Civil Engineering, Oklahoma State 
University.  
Oden, J.T. and Wellford Jr, L.C.  (1972 ). Analysis of flow of viscous fluids by the finite -element 
method.  AIAA Journal , 10(12), pp.1590 -1599.  
Oden, J.T., Demkowicz, L., Rachowicz, W. and Westermann, T.A.  (1989 ). Toward a universal hp 
adaptive finite element strategy, Part 2. A posteriori error estimation.  Computer methods in applied 
mech anics and engineering , 77(1-2), 113 -180. 
Oden, J.T., Duarte, C.A.M. and Zienkiewicz, O.C. (1998). A new cloud -based hp finite element 
method.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 153(1-2), 117 -126. 
Oden, J.T.  (2006). Finite elements of nonlinear continua , Courier Corporation.  
Oden, J.T. and Reddy, J.N. (2012).  An introduction to the mathematical theory of finite elements , 
Courier Corporation.  
Papadopoulos, P. and Taylor, R.L.  (1992 ). A mixed formulation for the finite element solution of 
contact problems.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 94(3), pp.373 -389. 
Pian, T.H. (1964). Derivation of element stiffness matrices by assumed stress distributions.  AIAA 
journal , 2(7), 1333 -1336.  
Pian, T.H. and Sumih ara, K. (1984). Rational approach for assumed stress finite 
elements.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 20(9), (1685 -1695.  
Peirce, D., Asaro, R.J. and Needleman, A. (1982). An analysis of nonuniform and localized 
deformation in du ctile single crystals.  Acta metallurgica , 30(6), 1087 -1119.  
Peterson, P.E.  (1980 ). Fracture energy of concrete: Method of determination.  Cement and 
Concrete research , 10(1), 79 -89. 
Nitsche, J. (1970). Lineare spline -funktionen und die methoden von Ritz für elliptische 
randwertprobleme. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis , 36(5), 348-355. 
Nitsche, J.A. and Schatz, A.H.  (1974).  Interior estimates for Ritz -Galerkin methods.  Mathematics 
of Computat ion, 28(128) , 937-958. 
Pham, K.H., Ravi -Chandar, K. and Landis, C.M.  (2017).  Experimental validation of a phase -field 
model for fracture.  International Journal of Fracture , 205(1), 83-101. 
Pietruszczak, S.T. and Mroz, Z.  (1981 ). Finite element analysis of deformation of strain‐softening 
materials.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 17(3), 327 -334. 
Raabe D, Klose P, Engl B, Imlau K -P, Friedel F, Roters  F. (2002). Concepts for integrating plastic 
anisotropy into metal forming simulations. Adv Eng Mater; 4, 169 –80. 
Rashid, Y.R.  (1968 ). Ultimate strength analysis of prestressed concrete pressure vessels.  Nuclear 
engineering and design , 7(4), 334-344. 
Roters, F., Eisenlohr, P., Hantcherli, L., Tjahjanto, D.D., Bieler, T.R. and Raabe, D. (2010). 
Overview of constitutive laws, kinematics, homogenization and multiscale methods in crystal 
plasticity finite -element modeling: Theory, experiments, app lications.  Acta Materialia , 58(4), 
1152 -1211.  
Research Report No. 233, General Dynamics, Ft. Worth, Texas.  
Prager, W. and Synge, J.L.  (1947).  Approximations in elasticity based on the concept of function 
space.  Quarterly of Applied Mathematics , 5(3), 241-269. 

 
29 
 Quey, R., Dawson, P.R. and Barbe, F. (2011). Large -scale 3D random polycrystals for the finite 
element method: Generation, meshing and remeshing.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics 
and Engineering , 200(17-20), 1729 -1745.  
Rahimi -Aghdam, S., Chau , V.T., Lee, H., Nguyen, H., Li, W., Karra, S., Rougier, E., Viswanathan, 
H., Srinivasan, G. and Bažant, Z.P., 2019. Branching of hydraulic cracks enabling permeability of 
gas or oil shale with closed natural fractures.  Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences , 116(5), pp.1532 -1537.  
Reissner, E. (1950). On a variational theorem in elasticity.  Journal of Mathematics and 
Physics , 29(1-4), 90 -95. 
Roters, F., Eisenlohr, P., Hantcherli, L., Tjahjanto, D.D., Bieler, T.R. and Raabe, D. (2010). 
Overv iew of constitutive laws, kinematics, homogenization and multiscale methods in crystal 
plasticity finite -element modeling: Theory, experiments, applications.  Acta Materialia , 58(4),  
1152 -1211.  
Ryckelynck, D.  (2005).   A priori hyper reduction method: an adaptive approach. Journal of 
computational physics, 202(1) , 346-366. 
Selmic, R.R. and Lewis, F.L.  (2002).  Neural -network approximation of piecewise continuous 
functions: application to friction compensation.  IEEE tran sactions on neural networks , 13(3), 
745-751. 
Saha, S., Gan, Z., Cheng, L., Gao, J., Kafka, O.L., Xie, X., Li, H., Tajdari, M., Kim, H.A. and Liu, 
W.K. (2021). Hierarchical Deep Learning Neural Network (HiDeNN): An artificial intelligence 
(AI) framework for  computational science and engineering.  Computer Methods in Applied 
Mechanics and Engineering , 373, 113452.  
Shakib, F., Hughes, T.J. and Johan, Z.  (1991 ). A new finite element formulation for computational 
fluid dynamics: X. The compressible Euler and Navier -Stokes equations.  Computer Methods in 
Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 89(1-3), 141 -219. 
Simo, J.C. and Taylor, R.L.  (1985).  Consistent tangent operators for rate -independent 
elastoplasticity.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 48(1), 101-118. 
Simo, J.C., Wriggers, P. and Taylor, R.L.  (1985 ). A perturbed Lagrangian formulation for the finite 
element solution of contact problems.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and 
engineering , 50(2), pp.163 -180. 
Simo, J.C. and Vu-Quoc, L.  (1986).  A three -dimensional finite -strain rod model. Part II: 
Computational aspects.  Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 58(1), 79-116. 
Simo, J.C. and Armero, F.  (1992).  Geometrically non‐linear enhanced strain mixed methods and 
the method of incompatible modes.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in 
Engineering , 33(7), 1413 -1449.  
Simo, J.C. and Ortiz, M.  (1985).  A unified approach to finite deformation elastoplastic analysis 
based on the use of hyperelastic constituti ve equations.  Computer methods in applied mechanics 
and engineering , 49(2), 221-245. 
Simo, J.C., Fox, D.D. and Rifai, M.S. (1989).  On a stress resultant geometrically exact shell model. 
Part II: The linear theory; computational aspects.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 
Engineering , 73(1), 53-92. 
Simo, J.C. and Laursen, T.A.  (1992 ). An augmented Lagrangian treatment of contact problems 
involving friction.  Computers & Structures , 42(1), pp.97 -116. 
Simo, J.C. and Hughes, T.J.  (2006). Computational inelasticity  (Vol. 7) Springer Science & 
Business Media.  

 
30 
 Simo, J.C. and Rifai, M. (1990). A class of mixed assumed strain methods and the method of 
incompatible modes.  International journal for numerical methods in engineering , 29(8),1595 -
1638.  
Šmilauer, V., Hoover, C.G., Bažant, Z.P., Caner, F.C., Waas, A.M. and Shahwan, K.W.  (2011 ). 
Multiscale simulation of fracture of braided composites via repetitive unit cells.  Engineering 
Fracture Mechanics , 78(6),  901-918. 
Strang, G. and Fix, G.J.  (1973 ). An analysis of the finite element method, Prentice Hall.  
Szabo, B. A., and Mehta, A.K.  (1978).  p-Convergent Finite Element Approximations in Fracture 
Mechanics, Int. J. Num. Meth. Engng , 12, 551-560. 
Synge, J.L. and Rheinboldt, W.C.  (1957).  The hyper  circle in mathematical physics.  Physics 
Today , 10(10), 45. 
Taylor, C.A., Hughes, T.J. and Zarins, C.K. (1998). Finite element modeling of blood flow in 
arteries. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 158(1-2) (1998) 155 -196. 
Tvergaard, V. and Needleman, A.  Analysis of the cup -cone fracture in a r ound tensile bar.  Acta 
metallurgica , 32(1) (1984)157 -169. 
Turner, M.J., Clough, R.W., Martin, H.C. and Topp, L.J. (1956). Stiffness and deflection analysis 
of complex structures.  journal of the Aeronautical Sciences , 23(9), 805 -823. 
Wagner, G.J. and Liu, W .K. (2003). Coupling of atomistic and continuum simulations using a 
bridging scale decomposition.  Journal of Computational Physics , 190(1), 249-274. 
Washizu, K., 1955.  On the variational principles of elasticity and plasticity . MASSACHUSETTS 
INST OF TECH C AMBRIDGE AEROELASTIC AND STRUCTURES RESEARCH LAB.  
Willcox, K. and Peraire, J. (2002). Balanced model reduction via the proper orthogonal 
decomposition. AIAA journal , 40(11), 2323 -2330.  
Williamson, F.  (1980). A historical note on the finite element method , Int. J. Num. Meth's. Eng.,  
15,  930 -934 
Wilson, Z.A., Borden, M.J. and Landis, C.M. (2013). A phase -field model for fracture in 
piezoelectric ceramics.  International Journal of Fracture , 183(2), 135 -153. 
Wriggers, P. and Moftah, S.O.  (2006 ). Mesoscale models for concrete: Homogeni zation and 
damage behavio r. Finite elements in analysis and design , 42(7),  623-636. 
Yu, C.,  Kafka, O. L.,  and Liu, W.K., (2019). Self-consistent clustering analysis for multiscale 
modeling at finite Strains . Com puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering. 349, 339 –
359. 
Zienkiewicz, O.C. and Cheung, Y.K. (1967) The Finite Element Method in Structural and 
Continuum Mechanics, McGraw -Hill, New York.  
Zlamal, M. (1968).  On the finite element method, Numerische  Math ., 12, 394 -40. 
Zhang, L., Gerstenberger, A., Wang, X. and Liu, W.K. (2004). Immersed finite element 
method.  Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 193(21-22)  2051 -2067.  
Zhang, L., Lu, Y., Tang, S., Liu, W. K. (2021).   HiDeNN -PGD:   reduced -order hierarchical deep 
learning neural networks, arXiv, 2105.06363.  
 

