A Mathematical Model, Implementation and Study
of a Swarm System
Blesson Varghese and Gerard T. McKee


Abstract—The work reported in this paper is motivated
towards the development of a mathematical model for
swarm systems based on macroscopic primitives. A pattern
formation and transformation model is proposed. The
pattern transformation model comprises two general
methods for pattern transformation, namely a macroscopic
transformation and mathematical transformation method.
The problem of transformation is formally expressed and
four special cases of transformation are considered.
Simulations to confirm the feasibility of the proposed models
and transformation methods are presented. Comparison
between the two transformation methods is also reported.
I. INTRODUCTION

S

WARM robotics research specifically deals with
some classical problems which have been of
concern to researchers over the years. An overall review
of work done in swarm robotics presented in [1]
identifies pattern formation as one challenge. The
problem of pattern formation relates to the microscopic
(influencing individual robot behavior) or macroscopic
(influencing group behavior) properties of a swarm
system.
Pattern formation has been addressed by researchers
in swarm robotics using two approaches, namely
potential fields and behavior based models. In [2] a
control law is proposed for pattern formation that
consists of the sum of a repulsive potential and an
attractive potential field. The approach is useful for the
classical problem of obstacle avoidance in patterns. The
paper reports pattern formation control based on
parameters describing microscopic behaviors and
presents a mathematical model for the control strategy.
In [3, 4] potential field and sliding mode control have
been used for pattern formations. In [5] the authors
study a general class of Attractive and Repulsive
functions used to achieve swarm aggregation. These
models lack a description of a swarm model describing
the macroscopic properties.
The behavior based approach has focused on pattern
formation behaviors for multi-robot teams and patterns
including the line, column, diamond and wedge
geometric formations have been reported [6]. Obstacle
avoidance and other navigational behaviors are

integrated within the model. Though the microscopic
properties of the system are defined, the group behavior
of a system cannot be explicitly determined by the
behavior based approach. Moreover this approach does
not lend itself to mathematical analysis and
formulations. Hence, the approach fails in articulating a
swarm model with macroscopic parameters.
Other approaches used by researchers in pattern
formation include the dynamic window approach [7] –
[9] and flow field method [10]. Both these approaches
consider microscopic properties of the swarm system.
In short, pattern formation approaches do not
consider macroscopic parameters of a swarm system.
Hence there arises a need to develop a pattern formation
model based on macroscopic parameters. There are five
main benefits of using macroscopic parameters. Firstly,
implicit coordination, which refers to the coordination
of a pattern comprising of mobile robots, need not be
specified externally. Coordination is achieved as a
result of varying the macroscopic properties. Secondly,
Group behavior definition, which refers to the
collective behavior of the group, is possible by
controlling the macroscopic parameters. The individual
behavior of the units is affected by the variation in the
macroscopic property. Thirdly, Adaptability, which
refers to the ability of the group to adjust to change of
internal or external circumstances, can be affected by
macroscopic parameters. Fourthly, Stability, which
refers to the factor by which the robot group maintains a
pattern, can be controlled by using macroscopic
parameter to dampen the propagation of errors. Fifthly,
higher order parameters can control parameters of
lower order.
Researchers tend to consider pattern transformation
along with pattern formation without much distinction.
Transformation, which refers to the reconfiguration of
swarm patterns, is a little considered area within swarm
robotics. Transformation of patterns is an appropriate
response to obstacles for unhindered motion. Patterns are
reconfigured by repositioning all or a subset of agents in a
swarm. A transformation may result in a change of
geometric orientation of a pattern and relationships
between interacting units in the pattern.

Work based on pattern transformation is reported in
[11], where a stable virtual leader pattern transforms to
a different pattern by the addition of a morphing force.
Illustrations of transformation and mathematical
notations for computation of forces in the pattern are
also presented. The transformation technique facilitates
pattern change by allowing participating agents to find
their own equilibrium. However, the morphing
procedure for transforming pattern is not defined.
An algorithm reported in [12] is capable of
transforming patterns in response to a command issued
by a human operator. The command is issued to a single
robot and causes a chain reaction in the neighboring
robots resulting in a global transformation. Pattern
transformation from a parabola to a sine curve is
illustrated. Though the notion of transforming patterns
is presented, the transformation method remains
unaddressed.
A relative distance versus orientation model for
transformation is reported in [13]. The strategy involves
varying the orientation value to globally transform a
triangle to a line formation. Though a positional
transformation is not executed on all participating
agents (one position remains unaltered), a global
geometrical transformation is achieved. This strategy is
specific to the scenario when a triangle to line
transformation is performed.
The use of affine transformations, a mathematical
tool, for transforming swarms patterns is presented in
[14]. The target position of each member of the swarm
is pre-determined by the mathematical transformation
tool. The shortest path between the original and target
positions is traced by considering the ant colony
optimization [15] algorithm. Simulation results
illustrate the transformation of a horizontal line pattern
to a diagonal line pattern. Though a mathematical
method is explored, a geometrical transformation
between different shapes may not be possible using
affine transformations.
In short, researchers have not concentrated on
investigating pattern transformation in swarm robotics.
General methods for reconfiguring patterns are not
emphasized either.
The work reported in this paper is motivated towards
the development of a swarm model based on primary
and secondary macroscopic primitives. A pattern
transformation model comprising two transformation
methods that enable geometric transformation are
proposed. Firstly, a swarm macroscopic parameter
oriented method based on macroscopic (group behavior
of a swarm pattern) parameters is proposed. Secondly, a
mathematical tool based on macroscopic and

Fig. 1. The primitives of the multi-agent pattern formation model.

microscopic (individual robot behavior) parameters is
proposed. The problem of transformation is formally
stated and four special cases of transformation are
considered. Experimental studies confirming the
feasibility of the proposed methods are presented.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II proposes the pattern formation model.
Section III states the problem of transformation and
presents the pattern transformation model. Sections IV
and V proposes two transformation methods
comprising the pattern transformation model. The
feasibility of the proposed models is confirmed by
simulation which is reported in Section VI. Section VII
concludes this paper and reports future work.
II. SWARM PATTERN FORMATION MODEL
This section proposes a mathematical model for
swarm pattern formation based on primary and
secondary primitives. The mathematical model is
formulated based on the foundations of the Complex
Plane. The De Moivre’s formula to obtain roots of an
equation is used to represent the model. If z = x + iy [16]
and is represented in the polar form as
z  r (cos   i sin  ) and r is called the absolute value or
the modulus of z, then z n  r n (cos n  i sin n ) for n =
0, 1, 2,… The nth root of z is obtained by
n

   2k 
  2k   where k = 0, 1,…
z  n r  cos 
 i sin 

 
 n 
  n 

(n-1). The roots of the equation lie on a circle of radius

n

r with centre at the origin and constitute the vertices

of a regular polygon of n sides. The result of joining the
n roots is an n-sided polygon. The polygon is
circumscribed by a circle otherwise referred as the
circumcircle of the polygon. When mapping these
results onto the area of multi-agent pattern formations,
it is assumed that the robotic agents are positioned on
the vertices of the polygon. Hence the robots form a
closed polygonal pattern and the system is mobile with
appropriate
communication
and
coordination
mechanism.
The mathematical model is realized by considering
macroscopic primitives (Figure 1). The term primitive
in this paper refers to an element used as a building
block to define aspects of the model. The macroscopic
primitives are separated into primary and secondary
primitives. Primary macroscopic primitives are basic or
fundamental elements. They are considered as input
variables to the model and are irreducible to simpler
parameters or expressions and therefore termed as
independent primitives. Secondary macroscopic
primitives are derived from other primitives of the
mathematical model. Hence, these primitives are
termed as dependent primitives.
The primary macroscopic primitives of the model
proposed in this paper are the total number of robots,
angular separation, formation radius and elongation.
The total number of robots in a polygonal pattern, given
by n, equates to the number of vertices of a polygon or
the roots of the complex equation. Angular separation is
an important factor that determines the coordinates for
positioning robots in a polygonal pattern. Angular
separation, denoted by  , is a measure of the angular
spacing between adjacent robots of a pattern. Formation
radius, denoted by r, is the radius of the circumscribing
circle of the polygonal pattern. This primitive
determines the area occupied by the pattern. Elongation
ratio of a pattern, denoted by e, is a ratio of magnitudes
of the major and minor axis of the pattern and quantifies
the shape transforming behavior of a pattern. The
symmetry of a pattern can also be described by the
elongation ratio.
The secondary macroscopic primitives are linear
distance and shaping radii. The distance between
adjacent robots in the polygon is a constant if the
polygon is regular. To compute the distance between
robots, the coordinate positions of the robots need to be
known. The centroid of the pattern, (h,k), is used to
compute the coordinates of robots. Further, the
Euclidean distance between adjacent robots A and B is
given by d AB  ( x B  x A )  ( y B  y A )
2

2

. Hence, linear

distance is dependent on the position coordinates of
robots.
The shaping radii along the x and y axis, sx and sy
respectively determine the measure of deflation or
inflation of a pattern laterally and longitudinally. The
magnitudes of elongation and formation radius are
useful to determine the shaping radii of a pattern and are
r
e

given by s x = re and s y = . The equations that define
the
shaping
radii
by x B = h + s x cos θ and

are

also

yB = k + s y sin θ

.

given
Hence,

orientation radii are dependent on formation radius and
elongation.
Variation in the magnitude of the shaping radii results
in a regular or irregular pattern. Regular patterns refer
to swarm formations as regular polygons. The regularity
of polygonal patterns is preserved by scaling (deflate or
inflate) the pattern laterally and longitudinally in equal
magnitudes. On the other hand, irregular patterns refer
to swarm formations as irregular polygons. Irregular
patterns can be obtained by scaling patterns laterally or
longitudinally with unequal magnitudes.
The swarm pattern formation model presented here is
chosen for the study of transformation. Two pattern
transformation methods are applied to the swarm model;
these are discussed in Section IV and V.
III. SWARM PATTERN TRANSFORMATION MODEL
Considering the fact that pattern transformation is
little addressed in research and general methods for
transformations are not investigated, the problem of
swarm pattern transformation is presented here.
The term transformation is also associated with
modular robotic systems. Algorithms to transform the
shape of modular robots are reported in [17]-[19].
However, it is necessary to draw distinction between
reconfiguration in modular systems and transformation
of swarm patterns considered in this paper. Firstly, in
modular robot systems physical connectivity between
modules exists ensuring modules in close vicinity of
adjacent modules. Secondly, reconfiguring in modules
is constrained by being able to reposition on the
periphery of an attached module. Thirdly,
reconfiguration in modules is not strictly geometry
oriented.
Definition: Consider a pattern P with geometric
relationships represented as GP . The pattern
P comprises of N robots such that their positions are
given by pi ( xi , yi ) where pi  2 and i  1,2,...,N .
Pattern P transforms into the pattern Q with geometric

constraints or relationships represented as GQ . The
pattern Q also comprises of N robots such that the
position of the robotic agents is given by qi ( xi , yi )
where qi  2 and i  1,2,...,N .
The function which enables the transformation of the
pattern P to Q is given by f ( P)  Q . In other words,

line. It is interesting to note that the scaling of a pattern
would result in a geometric transformation, since the
geometrical constraints are dissimilar in both cases.
Mathematically, the case of geometrical transformation
GQ  G P
would
be
such
that
and
i : pi ( xi , y i )  qi ( xi , y i ).

Case 4: GQ ≠ GP after transformation without
f  p1 ( x1 , y1 ), p2 ( x2 , y 2 ),..., p N ( x N , y N )   repositioning all agents. This case considers the
q1 ( x1 , y1 ), q2 ( x2 , y 2 ),...,q N ( x N , y N ).
geometric transformation such that the position of one

The application of an inverse transformation function
on the transformed pattern Q yields the pattern P,
given by f 1 (Q) = P. The transformation on the pattern
also results in a transformation of the geometrical
relationships from GP to GQ between the participating
agents in the pattern. Four cases of transformation
based on the above definition are derived by imposing
restrictions on the geometrical constraints.
Case 1: GQ  G P after a transformation that involves
repositioning all agents. This case is relevant when
robotic agents in the pattern have repositioned, yet the
geometrical pattern has not changed. Such a
transformation is termed as Elementary transformation
in this paper. This term also refers to those
transformations very basic in nature. For instance, a
swarm could be rotated with respect to its centroid or
translated such that all robotic agents have repositioned
themselves. Though the orientation of the pattern has
changed, the configuration of the pattern remains
unaltered. Mathematically, the case of elementary
transformation would be such that GQ  G P and
i : pi ( xi , y i )  qi ( xi , y i ).

Case 2: GQ  G P after a transformation without
repositioning all agents. This case considers the rotation
or translation of the swarm with respect to some robotic
agent whose position remains fixed. This case is also
classified under Elementary transformation, yet
repositioning of all agents has not occurred.
Mathematically, this case of elementary transformation
GQ  G P
would
be
such
that
and
i : pi ( xi , y i )  qi ( xi , yi )

Case 3: GQ  G P after a transformation that involves
repositioning all agents. This relates to the case when
the geometrical constraints of the pattern have changed
and a new pattern has emerged. It is termed a
Geometric transformation. This concept is relevant
when robotic agents in the pattern reposition to result in
a geometry change. For instance, the shape of a swarm
could be geometrically transformed from a polygon to a

or more than one robotic agent remains fixed. It is
classified under geometric transformation, yet
repositioning of all agents has not occurred.
Mathematically, the case of geometrical transformation
GQ  G P
would
be
such
that
and
i : pi ( xi , y i )  qi ( xi , yi ) .

Cases 1 and 2 relate to elementary transformation of
the pattern. In these cases, the geometric constraint or
relationship
persists
even
after
elementary
transformation. Cases 3 and 4 consider geometric
transformation. In these cases the geometrical
relationships change after transformation.
The swarm pattern formation model presented in the
previous section is chosen for the study of
transformation. Two feasible transformation methods,
namely a macroscopic transformation method and a
mathematical transformation method are proposed in
this paper. Cases 1, 3 and 4 of transformation are
considered in the transformation methods. Case 2 will
be reported in a future paper.
IV. METHOD 1: MACROSCOPIC TRANSFORMATION
The transformation method proposed in this section is
inclusive of elementary and geometric transformations
applied on the swarm model. Transformations of cases
1, 3 and 4 are achieved by varying the secondary
macroscopic primitives, namely the shaping radii
(along x and y axis) of the swarm model. It is interesting
to note that a sequences of operations performed on the
swarm model results in a transformation. The set of
operations are:
1) Rotation: The initial step of rotation of the model is
performed to achieve collision avoidance during the
next step. A predefined angle offset is used to rotate the
swarm. Though the robots are repositioned, the
operation results in the same polygonal pattern with a
different orientation from the former. Here, the concept
of elementary transformation is introduced. Though all
robots were repositioned in this operation, a geometric
transformation is not evident since the shape of the
pattern is retained. Though a geometric transformation

is not evident, yet an elementary transformation of case
1 is achieved in this step.
2) Macroscopic Parameter Operation: Following a
rotation operation, the macroscopic parameter is set to
be modified. Deflating the model along the y-axis
would result in a deformed polygonal pattern. The
deflation of the model is performed by decrementing
the magnitude of the shaping radius along the y-axis.
When deflation has reached its maximum value, the
robotic agents have aligned themselves entirely along
the x-axis. Maximum deflation is achieved when the
shaping radius value along any axis vanishes. An
inflation operation along the other perpendicular axis
simultaneously while deflating would result in a pattern
with larger inter-linear distance between the agents (a
measure for avoiding collisions). This variation is
possible due to the notion of flexibility in rigid patterns.
3) Further Rotation: This step is performed to
achieve equidistance between the participating agents.
Though the pattern has transformed its shape by this
step, the participating agents are still governed by the
rules of the swarm model. A corrective rotation measure
would ensure that the agents are loosely equidistant.
V. METHOD 2: MATHEMATICAL TRANSFORMATION
The method proposed in this section considers case
3, which is achieved by using a mathematical
transformation tool. Many mathematical tools are
available for transformations which include stretching,
rotating, reflecting and translating transformations. The
linear fractional transformation is one such readily
available mapping function that maps a set of points
from one plane to another. The transformation is given
az  b
, where z, a, b, c and d are complex
cz  d
numbers satisfying ad - bc  0. The linear fractional

by f ( z ) 

transformation is also known as a Moebius
transformation [16].
The transformation functions are applied onto the
swarm pattern which is polygonal in shape. Since the
vertices of the polygonal pattern lie on the circle
circumscribing the pattern, a circle to line and a line to
circle transformations of the complex plane are used.
However, the transformation function cannot be applied
directly to the multi-robot pattern. This is due to the fact
that the multi-robot pattern is defined on a global frame
of reference while the mathematical function is
applicable on the local frame of reference. Hence, the
sequence of operations performed on the multi-robot
pattern is:

1) Transformation from global to local frame of
reference: The frame of reference of the multi-robot is
temporarily transformed from the global to a local
frame. The local frame of reference considered is such
that the circumscribing circle is divided into four equal
quadrants. Hence the centroid of the pattern lies on the
origin position of the local frame.
2) Discrete Transformation: This step applies the
mathematical transformation function on the
multi-robot model. The transformation of a circle to a
line is obtained from w  i

(1  z )
. Applying the equation
(1  z )

on the Euclidean plane, the mapping function is
deduced

as


2y
1  x 2  y 2 

,

2
2
2
2
 1 x  y 1 x  y 

.

The

transformation from a line to a circle is applied by
considering a special case of the Moebius
transformation. The transformation w 

1
maps every
z

straight line or circle onto a circle or straight line. It is
also known as the inversion in the unit circle or
reciprocal transformation. Applying the equation on the
Euclidean plane, the mapping function is otherwise




 . The destination
written as 
,
2  y2 x2  y2 
x


coordinates obtained by the mathematical functions are
the coordinates to which individual robot agents need to
reposition while the pattern transforms. However, it is
evident that these transformation functions are discrete
in nature yielding only one set of destination coordinate
rather than sub-goals or intermediate destination
coordinates.
3) Transformation from local to global frame of
reference with magnification: The destination
coordinates are obtained on the local frame of
reference. Hence, the local frame needs to be shifted to
the global frame of reference. Since the mathematical
functions considered in step (ii) are reducing functions
(destination coordinates reduce the span of the pattern),
a magnification ratio is used in the local frame to
achieve gain in the destination coordinates.
4) Path planning by discretization: Since the
achieved destination coordinate set is discrete, the
major challenge in repositioning agents is to plan their
path to the destination coordinates. In this paper, the
technique adopted to reposition robots is along straight
line trajectories without collisions. The straight line
path between the agent and its estimated destination is
discretized. A straight line discretization process is
done by slicing the domain values to extrapolate the
x

y

range values. This relates to the underlying principle of
Discrete Event Simulations (DEVS). The potential of
DEVS in path planning for robots is reported in [20].
VI. SIMULATION STUDIES
Simulation studies were developed to validate and
visualize the proposed geometric approaches for pattern
formation and transformation. Most robotic simulators
proved ineffective for incorporating the geometric
approach. Hence, a non-robotic particle physics
simulation engine was employed. The remainder of this
section is organised into understanding the
experimental environment, studies on pattern formation
and transformation.
A. Experimental Environment
The feasibility of the proposed approach was
validated on the Processing [21] and Traer Physics [22]
environment. Processing is an open source
programming language and environment enabling
visualizations for learning and prototyping. Traer
Physics is a particle physics simulation engine for
Processing.
The traer physics library has provisions for modeling
a particle system, particles, springs and attractive or
repulsive forces [22]. The particle system enables
prototyping particles and forces. Particles represent
objects having four properties, namely mass, position,
velocity and age. Particles can be stationary or dynamic
in an environment. Springs can connect two particles
and prevent collisions. Springs are characterized by
three properties, namely rest length, strength and
damping. Attractions or repulsions pull particles
together or apart and have two properties, namely
strength and minimum distance. The simulations
reported in this paper employ particle system, particles
and attractive or repulsive forces.
The swarm pattern is designed as particles in an open
environment with forces, namely macro and micro level
forces of attraction and repulsion acting on the pattern.
The macro level forces include repulsive forces, which
act on the centroid of the swarm. The forces of
repulsion are generated from obstacles (modeled as
forces) in the environment. All robotic agents align
themselves around the centroid with respect to the
forces forming a virtual structure polygonal pattern.
Obstacles in the path of the pattern are detected by the
computation of the net force acting on the group of
robots. Beyond a maximum threshold value of force, the
pattern reacts appropriately by transforming its shape to
avoid obstacles. The pattern regains its polygonal shape
when the net force acting on the centroid decreases

below a minimum threshold value, such as when the
pattern has escaped from obstacles. The inter-agent
bonding force and the forces of interaction with the
centroid contribute to the micro level forces. The
pattern generates a propulsive force to trace paths
against repulsive forces.
The experimental setup comprised a tunnel through
which the swarm had to displace. The walls of the
tunnel generated repulsive forces and acted as the
obstacle. The swarm initiated its motion from the left of
the tunnel and aimed to reach a goal beyond the tunnel
on the right side.
B. Studies on Pattern Formation
Regular pattern formations were studied when the
robot pattern displaced through obstacles similar to
bridges and tunnels. The pattern was expected to deflate
when subjected to a potential above a minimum
threshold force, continue motion and inflate beyond the
obstacles. Simulation results for regular pattern
formation with 5 and 6 robots are presented in figure 2
(left columns).
Irregular pattern formations were studied when the
geometric robot patterns displaced through obstacles
that converged and hence offered a narrowed path of
movement. This replicated motion through a funnelled
path. The pattern was expected to deflate laterally or
longitudinally when subjected to a potential above a
minimum threshold. Simulation results for irregular
pattern formation with 5 and 6 robots are presented in
figure 2 (right columns).
It is observed from both the regular and irregular
pattern formation simulations that the patterns deflated
to traverse through obstacle paths. Beyond obstacle
paths, the patterns inflated to achieve their original
configuration. It is notable that obstacle avoidance is an
inherent property of the system and hence implicitly
guaranteed since obstacles are modelled as forces.
These observations are consistent with the theoretical
studies of Section 3 and according to the authors
expectations. Hence, the simulation studies confirm the
formulations of the geometric approach for polygonal
robot configurations.
C. Studies on Pattern Transformation
Both transformation methods discussed in Section
IV and V were implemented. The macroscopic method
of Section IV, consisting of a sequence of three
operations, was implemented. Firstly, the swarm model
was rotated to avoid collisions while deflating. Table I
illustrates the different rotation angles that were applied
on the swarm. Higher value angles resulted in collisions
for most patterns. Angles less than 15 degrees proved

Fig. 2. Left columns (n = 5 and 6) Regular pattern formation and obstacle avoidance through a tunnel. Right columns (n = 5 and 6) Irregular pattern
formation and obstacle avoidance through a funneled path.

effective for collision avoidance. Secondly, the
macroscopic parameters were varied. This variation
resulted in deflation or inflation of the pattern (along
the x or y axis). Thirdly, a corrective rotation was
applied to avoid agents from colliding against each
other. Hence by transformation of the pattern, the
swarm successfully displaced itself through the obstacle
path. Figure 3 is a snapshot of the simulation studies for
n = 3 to 6, 10 and 20 robots transforming in accordance
with the first method.
TABLE I
PRE DEFINED ROTATION VALUES & ESTIMATED
COLLISIONS

ANGLE
OFFSET
NO. OF
ROBOTS
3
4
5
6

15º

30 º

45 º

60 º

-

1
3

2
-

1
3

The mathematical method of Section V which
consists of a sequence of four steps was implemented.
Firstly, the swarm pattern was transformed from the
global to a local frame such that the centroid of the
pattern lies on the origin of local frame of reference.
Hence, the pattern is equally spanned over the four
quadrants in the local frame of reference, which was

necessary for proper implementation of the
transformation functions.
Secondly, the discrete transformation function was
applied on the microscopic property, namely the
position coordinates of the individual robots in the
pattern. The transformation from a circle to line was
employed in order for the pattern to pass through the
tunnel in the environment. Beyond the obstacles, the
transformation from a line to circle was employed. Both
transformation operations yield a set of discrete
destination coordinates for each robot.
Thirdly, transformation from the local to global frame
of reference was performed. The destination
coordinates obtained in the local frame of reference
were such that the pattern radius is reduced. Hence a
magnification of the coordinates in the local frame was
performed and further mapped on to the global frame of
reference.
Fourthly, path planning by discretization was
executed. This step is essential to determine the sub
goals
or
intermediate
position
coordinates.
Repositioning the robots to sub-goals or intermediate
coordinates is a computationally expensive process.
Straight line trajectories from agents to calculated
destination coordinates without collisions were
considered in the work reported in this paper. Figure 4
is a snapshot of the simulation studies for 17 robots that
transform shape in accordance with the second method.
It is observed that the circle to line transformation
yielded a pattern in which robotic agents were loosely
equidistant. The line to circle transformation employing

Fig. 3. Simulation results on Traer Physics and Processing simulator for the first method. (i) Rotated swarm model for various number of robots, (ii)
Deflation of the model along the y – axis (For n = 10 and 20, inflation along x – axis performed), (iii) Transformed pattern without corrective rotation
measure, (iv) Transformed pattern after corrective rotation measure is applied (Except for n = 3 and 4, since equidistance is more or less achieved), (v)
Inverse transformation by inflation back to original pattern.

the reciprocal transformation yielded a polygon irregular in
nature. This was due to the nature of the reciprocal
transformation, which was anticipated.
It was observed that in both methods, the swarm
successfully displaced itself through the obstacle path
by transforming shape. The transformed patterns were
loosely equidistant. Collision avoidance between
repositioning agents is not implicitly guaranteed. Hence,
at least one operation in both methods ensured collision
avoidance. The geometrical transformation of a circle to
a line in both cases was achieved by transforming a
regular polygonal pattern to an irregular pattern by
repositioning agents. The observations are consistent
with the theoretical studies in Section IV and V and
according to the authors expectation.

D. Results
The time taken to transform a pattern in the two
transformation methods for different number of robots in
the configuration was measured. This experiment was
carried out for different number of robots varying from 3 to
25 and keeping the initial formation radius of the swarm a
constant. Figure 5 (left) and Figure 5 (right) are graphs
plotted using MATLAB and are based on the results

obtained from simulation for the first and second
transformation method respectively. The graphs show the
time taken for transformation versus the number of robots
in the pattern.
The average time taken to transform a pattern in the first
transformation method was computed as 20.35 seconds. It
is noted that the values plotted on the graph can be
divided into two bands. Firstly, the set of times that lie
below 20 seconds and secondly, those that lie above 20
seconds. The first band follows a linear trend with a
steady rise. Though the second set of times is scattered,
they form three different clusters for n = 4 to 8, 11 to 15
and 22 to 25.
Working from left to right on the robot axis, the
smallest time taken for transforming the pattern was
observed when three robots constituted the pattern. This
was due to the fact that a corrective rotation step was
not required for obtaining equidistance between the
patterns. Hence, the robots traversed lesser distances to
achieve the transformed pattern. There is a steep rise in
the time taken to transform the patterns for n = 4 to 8.
This can be accounted for by the fact that the initial
rotation and further rotation steps cause the robots to
trace further distances to keep themselves equidistant.

Fig. 4. Simulation studies on Processing and Traer Physics for the second transformation method presented in two stages. . Firstly, a circle to a line
transformation (First three rows excluding the fourth sequence in the third row). Secondly, a line to circle transformation (Fourth sequence of the third row
and last two rows).

For n = 9 and 10, however the time taken has a steep
fall. It is likely that the robots trace less distances for
collision avoidance in these cases. The highest time for
transformation was noted for n = 11 to 15. This was due
to the fact that a higher degree of rotation was required
initially to avoid collisions. Hence the robots took
longer times to reposition. In the further rotation step,
more agents compared to the previous cases had to
reposition. Hence, this accounts for this cluster having
the largest time. For n = 16 to 21 there is a gradual
increase in the time taken to transform, but much lower
than the time taken by the previous cluster since the
corrective rotation step was not necessary. An increase
in the time taken for n = 22 to 25 is noted. This was due
to the fact that during transformation an inflation
operation was performed along the x-axis to
accommodate all the robots. Hence, this led to an
increase in time.
The average time taken to transform a pattern in the
second method was computed as 21.40 seconds, slightly
higher than the first method. It is noted that the values

plotted on the graph can be divided into two bands. Firstly,
the set of times that lie above 21 seconds and secondly,
those that lie below 21 seconds. The first band follows a
linear trend with a steady decrease. Though the second
band lies scattered, all set of times in this band lie close to
20 seconds.
Working from left to right on the robot axis, the longest
time taken to transform a pattern was observed when 3
robots constituted the pattern. This was due to the nature of
the mathematical transformation in which the 3 robots
traverse longer distances within the pattern to reach their
destination coordinates. The transformation time decreases
steadily until n = 11 due to the fact that the distance
traversed within the pattern decreases. For n > 11, the set of
times is scattered closely around the 20 second time line. It
is evident that the mathematical transformation method is
consistent and effective for patterns with more than 11
constituting robots. This is due to the fact that robots
traversed lesser distances in the pattern. However, the time
taken for a few configurations (n > 11) is greater than 20
seconds. This can be accounted for the fact that collision
avoidance in robots was achieved by temporarily

Fig. 5. Graphs obtained from experiments. (Left) Graph plotted based on the first transformation method. (Right) Graph plotted based on the second transformation
method.

decelerating alternative robots in the configuration and
hence led to a small increase in time. The lowest time taken
to transform is for n = 20. In this case, the distance
traversed by robots and collision avoidance deceleration of
alternative robots in the pattern is minimal.
It is understood from the graphs that the mathematical
transformation method employing both macroscopic and
microscopic parameters is not advantageous for small
number of robots. For smaller number of robots, the robots
in the mathematical method traverse more distance within
the pattern. As the number of robots increase, the distance
traversed by a robot within the pattern decreases. The
mathematical method performs better than the
macroscopic method for higher number of robots. As the
number of robots increase, the mathematical method tends
to be effective since the time taken to transform decreases.
However, the first method performs consistently for any
number of robots.

E. Comparing the methods
The transformation methods presented in this paper are
feasible methods for reconfiguring patterns. However, it is
noted that the mathematical method employing Moebius
transformation is not strictly macroscopic in nature. The
microscopic properties of the swarm units are taken into
consideration. For example, path planning of individual
robots is necessary to reposition the robots. The method is
not advantageous for small number of robots in the pattern.
Moreover the mathematical transformation method is a
discrete transformation method. Hence, discretizing and
quantizing the path to reposition are required. This is a
computationally expensive process unsupported and
unwarranted on minimal processing swarm units.
Therefore global planning is required thereby increasing
wireless communication overheads. A high bandwidth for
communication and synchronized and consistent

communication with a centralized unit are challenges in
realizing the mathematical method in real time.
On the other hand, the macroscopic method considers the
group behaviour of the swarm system. Hence, individual
robots need not be addressed, eliminating microscopic
parameter operations. For example, transformation in the
first method is obtained by a sequence of operations
performed on the entire swarm pattern rather than
considering individual robot path planning. The
macroscopic method is observed to be consistent in the
time taken for transformation, and is also a continuous
method thereby reducing computations for individual
robot planning. This method would hence offer better
synchronization between the swarm units since local
planning is sufficient. Hence wireless communication
overheads are relatively less compared to the mathematical
method.
By implementing a macroscopic method in a real time
robot system, planning overheads for individual robots
could be minimized. However, a mathematical
transformation function is advantageous since it belongs to
an analytical class of tools and mathematical analysis is
possible.
In summary, the simulation studies confirm the
feasibility of the proposed methods. The transformation
cases discussed in Section III are considered in the
transformation methods. A brief comparison between the
method employing only macroscopic parameters and the
method employing both microscopic and macroscopic
parameters is presented based on the results obtained.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
The swarm pattern formation model presented in this
paper considers macroscopic and microscopic
primitives. The swarm pattern transformation model

comprising two transformation methods, namely a
macroscopic transformation and mathematical
transformation method are proposed. The first method is
a macroscopic parameter method while the second
considers both, macroscopic and microscopic parameters.
A formal definition for transformation is presented with
four special cases of transformation. Elementary and
geometrical transformations are considered by
repositioning agents. Transformation using both methods
is achieved by a sequence of operations performed on the
swarm pattern. The proposed methods are implemented on
the Processing and Traer Physics environment. A
comparison between the two methods considering
transformation time from one pattern to another is
presented. The simulation studies confirm the feasibility of
the proposed methods.
Future work will include the real time implementation of
the proposed transformation methods on a swarm robot
system. The challenges in mapping simulation studies to
real time robot systems will be studied. Efforts will be
made to explore continuous mathematical transformation
methods which are expected to minimize individual robot
path planning.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bayindir and E. Sahin, “A Review of Studies in Swarm
Robotics,” in the Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering,
Vol. 15, No 2, 2007, pp. 115 – 147.
[2] D. V. Dimarogonas and K. J. Kyriakopoulos, “Decentralized
Swarm Aggregation with Static Communication Links,” in the
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Robot
Communication and Coordination (RoboComm), Athens,
Greece, 2007.
[3] V. Gazi, B. Fidan, Y. S. Hanay and M. I. Koksal “Aggregation,
Foraging and Formation Control of Swarms with
Non-Holonomic Agents Using Potential Functions and Sliding
Mode Techniques,” in the Turkish Journal of Electrical
Engineering, Vol. 15, No 2, 2007, pp. 149 – 168.
[4] O. Soysal, E. Bahceci and E. Sahin, “Aggregation in Swarm
Robotic Systems: Evolution and Probabilistic Control,” in the
Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering, Vol. 15, No 2, 2007,
pp. 199 – 225.
[5] V. Gazi and K. M. Passino, “A Class of Attraction / Repulsion
Function for Stable Swarm Aggregations.” in the Proceedings
of the 41st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Las
Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2002, pp. 2842 – 2847.
[6] T. Balch and R. C. Arkins, “Motor Schema based Formation
Control for Multiagent Robot Teams,” in the Proceedings of the
First International Conference on Multiagent systems, San
Francisco, USA, 1995.
[7] D. Fox, W. Burgard and S. Thrun, “The dynamic window
approach to collision avoidance” in the IEEE Robotics and
Automation Magazine, 1997, Pg. 23 – 33.
[8] M. Seder and I. Petrovic, “Dynamic Window based approach to
mobile robot motion control in the presence of moving
obstacles” in the Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, Italy, 2007, Pg. 1986
– 1991.

[9] P. Ogren and N. E. Leonard, “Obstacle avoidance in formation”
in the Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, Taipei, 2003, Pg. 2492 – 2497.
[10] J. Shao, L. Wang and G. Xie, “Flexible Formation Control for
Obstacle Avoidance Based on Numerical Flow Field” in the
45th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2006, Pg.
5986-5991.
[11] G. H. Elkaim and R. J. Kelbley, “A lightweight formation
control methodology for a swarm of non-holonomic vehicles”
in the Proceedings of the IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2006.
[12] R. Mead, J. B. Weinberg and J. R. Croxell. “A Demonstration
of a Robot Formation Control Algorithm and Platform” in the
Proceedings of the 22nd AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2007.
[13] L. Cheng, Y. Wang and Q. Zhu, “A communication-based
multirobot rigid formation control system: design and analysis”
in the International Journal of modeling, identification and
control, 2006, Pg. 13 – 22.
[14] X. –B. Chen, Y. Zhang and F. Pan, “Affine Transformation for
Swarm Formations by generalized Ant Colony Optimization,”
in the Proceedings of the International Conference on
Innovative Computing Information and Control, 2008.
[15] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo and A. Colorni, “The ant system:
optimization by a colony of cooperating agents,” in the IEEE
Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics- Part B, Vol. 26,
1996, pp. 1 – 13.
[16] E. Kreyszig, “Advanced Engineering Mathematics”, 9th
Edition, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2006.
[17] T. Maegawa and A Ishiguro, “Self-reconfiguration by a
Modular Robot that has a Cell-differentiation ability,” in the
Proceedings of the SICE-ICASE International Joint
Conference, Korea, pp. 2073 – 2077, 2006.
[18] J. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Ma, J. Wang and H. Cao, “Transformation
technique Research of the improved link-type shape Shifting
Modular robot,” in the Proceedings of IEEE International
Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, China, pp. 295 –
300, 2006.
[19] W. H. Lee and A. C. Sanderson, “Dynamic Rolling Locomotion
and Control of Modular Robots,” in the IEEE Transactions on
Robotics and Automation, Feb 2002.
[20] O. Arikan, S. Chenney and D. A. Forsyth, “Efficient
Multi-Agent Path Planning,” in the Proceedings of the
Eurographic Workshop on Computer Animation and
Simulation, Manchester, UK, 2001, pp. 151 – 162.
[21] Processing website: http://www.processing.org
[22] Traer
Physics
website:
http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~traer/physics

